Chapter one

Scott Paine Design and the Elco 70 Foot boat

The Electric Launch Company was one of the world's premier builders of power boats. In its stellar 57 years of boat building, Elco produced more than 6000 pleasure boats and more than 1500 military vessels, from the 55 electric launches introduced to the world at the 1893 Chicago World's Colombian Exposition, to the 399 PT boats of World War II. The man who managed Elco was Executive Vice President Henry R. Sutphen, a minister's son from Morristown, New Jersey, and an electrician by trade. It appears Sutphen joined Elco as early as 1892, and may have been the brains behind the World's Fair project. In 1905, the University of Michigan graduated a naval architecture student named Irwin Chase, who Sutphen would hire in 1906.

Irwin Chase was a power-boat man to the core. He particularly loved to experiment with high-powered boats, and is credited (at least by Elco) with designing one of the world's first "planing hulls", a 20' "Elcoplane" named Bug, in 1911. Chase spent countless hours on the water developing high-speed small boats, and like other designers of his time his experiments involved "stepped" hulls. He designed a 20-footer with a perfectly flat bottom, and then corrugated metal sheets to the after half. Using special shims, Chase could alter the angles of the boat's steps, and he also experimented with step angles to correct the boat's tendency to slip sideways on high-speed turns.

Sutphen promoted Irwin Chase to the position of general manager, and named Glenville S. Tremaine chief designer.

Tremaine had been a ship fitter's apprentice at the Bath Iron Works in his native Maine, and he took correspondence courses in draftsmanship at the same time. He studied yacht design under Henry Douglas Bacon and was "loaned" to naval architect Morris Whitaker for a brief assignment to New York in 1912. When work at Bath slowed down, Tremaine answered a newspaper ad for a draftsman and was hired by Elco in March, 1913, on the day Woodrow Wilson was inaugurated. The following day, Tremaine turned 21.

Tremaine was Chase's apprentice and assistant draftsman until the 1923 shake-up; after his promotion. Tremaine carried on the Elco design traditions that Chase began in 1906, and he drew wonderful cruisers and motor yachts through the Roaring Twenties, aided by his new assistant, Alfred "Bill" Fleming. Tremaine loved to create new boat designs, and he loved tinkering with new ideas; he had little patience with details, however, and left that to Fleming. In time, Fleming became Elco's premier stylist.

In 1923, Elco opened its famous "Port Elco" showroom in downtown New York, and for the first time customers could walk in off the street and browse among a selection of yachts from 32' to more than 50' in length. Henry Sutphen not only borrowed standardized construction from the auto industry but began to adapt Detroit marketing techniques as well. In that year, Sutphen also shook up Elco's management. Before leaving town on a business trip, he had assigned Elco General Manager Thomas Hanson the task of preparing new boats for the 1923 Motorboat Show. When Sutphen returned to Elco, he found out that little or nothing had been done for the show, so he fired Hanson. Sutphen then promoted Irwin Chase to the position of general manager, and named Glenville S. Tremaine chief designer.

The Depression hurt Elco, as it hurt most boat builders, but the effects of the Depression didn't make themselves felt right away. Elco continued to build boats and pay for eight-page advertising spreads in boating magazines well after 1929. The low point came in 1933, when Elco was reduced to only three full-time employees: Chase, Tremaine, and general foreman Charles Lamont. To keep busy, they personally fulfilled orders for spare parts, answered correspondence, and ran exhaustive dynamometer tests on new engines, just for something to tinker with. Gradually, over several years, the old employees were rehired and boat building resumed.

Franklin Delano Roosevelt's relationship with Elco dated back to the World's Colombian Exposition in 1893, when Roosevelt's father took him to the fair. Young Franklin took one of his first boat rides in one of the electric launches, and may have developed his lifelong interest in things nautical from this experience. During World War I Roosevelt was Assistant Secretary of the Navy, and had worked closely with Sutphen and Chase on the motor launch project. Sutphen and Roosevelt maintained their friendship through Roosevelt's Presidency.

It was in 1938 that Elco, through the efforts of of Charles Edison, at the time Secretary of the Navy became interested in the possibilities of producing torpedo boats for the US Navy.

Sutphen kept a close eye on European development and Hurbert Scott Paine, who was recognized as a genius. At the time he was employed by the British Power Boat Company. At the time the British had the Thorneycroft from the CBM, the Vosper, and Scott Paine designed boats. Elco felt that if one of these designs could be purchased, or at least an American license for one of these designs, there would be a market for the craft with the US Government.

It was on February 10,1939 that Sutphen and at the time Chief Designer, Irwin Chase embarked for England onboard the Queen Mary, to check out the boats. What made Elco have such a sudden interest in PT’s was summed up by Chase when he said, the principle reason was we had a long experience in hull design, with which the average Naval Officer was not familiar with. We felt that a small high speed motor boat could be so designed so that she would be fit to head to sea, and stay there in any type of weather. Chase based Elco’s gamble on their superior knowledge and ability to handle the factors of rough weather and high speed engines in relationship to the boats.

Sutphen and Chase were given unusual opportunities by the Royal Navy to observe the boats. They both felt that the US would be better off with one of the boats, but choosing one was most difficult.

Both men really wanted to pick a boat that could handle the roughest treatment. This would be the turning factor in their decision to pick the Scott-Paine 70’ design. It was then and there that Elco would make the choice to purchase one of the boats. Negotiations for the Scott-Paine boat were successful, and on March 17, 1939 Mr. Sutphen reported by radio that the boat had been made and that favorable terms to ship the boat in three months would be made. In order to comply with the wording of the appropriation act, Elco on April 25, 1939 submitted proposal for construction of one 70’ Scott-Paine design. This contract was signed on June 1, 1939.

The boat was shipped to Elco in New York on September 4, 1939. From there it would be lightered to the Electric Boat Company plant in Groton, Connecticut. Dubbed PT-9, the boat was put through a series of tests and sea trials. Commodore A. Loring Swasey acted as observer for these trials. Scott Paine himself came over with the boat, and was in charge of its operation.

Elco would invite the US Navy to send their representatives, to take trial spins on the boat. The Coast Guard would also send an observer for the trials, although they felt this type of craft was too limited to warrant an investment. Scott-Paines performance with PT-9 were very influential in the ultimate sale of the boat to the government.

When PT-9 arrived in Bayonne, it was powered by three Rolls Royce Merlin engines. Col. J.G. Vincent, Packard's chief designed felt that an American engine could better the performance of the Rolls Royce product. He would convince Elco, and later PT-9 was re-engined, using the Packard W-8 engine. The boat displaced some 40 tons, carrying four eighteen inch torpedoes, in four front launching tubes. Government acquisition was slated for November 1, 1939, but this date was postponed until January 3, 1940. This worked out for Elco as they used this delay to familiarize themselves the boat. Later, acquisition was delayed six months, which proved to be in Elco’s favor, as they studied construction and were prepared to build their own version of the boat.

Delivery finally took place on June 17, 1940, and PT-9 was placed in service with Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron One, on July 24, 1940. Elco would base its first boats on the Scott-Paine model and the delivery delay allowed them to examine the boat, check out its construction principles, and adapt or modify the design characteristics of the English boat to best suit the needs of our Navy. Of course not all the time was spent in Bayonne, as they did underway sea testing and ordnance material tests.

It was on November 10,1939, that Elco was allotted $5,000,000 to build boats, but due to difficulties Elco was having with Packard, in contracting for twenty-three additional boats, there was a small delay which was ironed out and on December 7, 1939, the Navy made an award to build 11 Motor Torpedo Boats, PT’s 10-19, and 12 Motor Boat Sub Chasers, PTC’s 1-12.

Elco would begin construction of the 70 foot boats in January of 1940, at their plant in Bayonne, New Jersey. The new boats were basically a small modified version of PT-9. As mentioned the three engines would be powered by Packard Marine Engines, powering some 1,200 HP each. The canopy was a bit larger and could be removed in three sections. The pilot house was enlarged and flushed with the trunk canopy. This would be done to try and eliminate sea spray and obtain better wind deflection.

A storage space was added to stow gear, by fitting an alloy boot to the front of the pilot house below her forward windows. The bridge was enlarged and lined with aluminum on the sides and the deck. Aluminum grab rails were installed and fitted around the bridge and top of the canopy. The Dewandre powered machine gun turrets were enlarged, located mid section of the canopy, and could now hold .50 caliber Browning M-2 machine guns, instead of the smaller .30 caliber machine guns. Six cowl vents were added to the aft section of the deck.

The boats were constructed using an Alaskan Spruce keel, with the frames being made using African Mahogany, with sides and bottom double planked Mahogany, with canvas and marine glue, in between the diagonally spaced planking. They used monel screws below the water line, with brass or bronze above. None of these boats would would ever see combat with the US Navy, as they were lend-leased to the British. They did see considerable action with the British, but before that Elco made major modifications to the boats before being turned over. This brought the boats to British specifications.

It was felt that these boats were too short to carry the American twenty-one-inch torpedoes. It was because of this, that the Bureau of Ordnance recommended that all succeeding PT boats would enlarged in length , which would bring out Elco’s seventy-seven-foot PT boat.