Chapter four photo descriptions

1. These four women workers are on their way to begin a shift. As more men were leaving Elco for the service, it was these young women that would pick up the slack in all of the departments. They are dressed for the times with saddle shoes and company overhauls. Notice behind them is the enclosed walkway which lead from Building 20 to the company vault. (PT Boats Inc.)

2. Office workers standing out front of Building 20. This was the main office area of the plant and included the offices of all management. Many of the women in this photo were personal secretaries, working for upper management teams. (PT Boats Inc.)

2b. These women workers take time for a quick photo before their shift. They are posing in front of a 1941 Chrysler Crown Imperial, one of the several cars that Elco purchased for war time use. As with all United States built automobiles, production was suspended February 1942 due to World War II production demands, and did not resume until the 1946 model year. Executive Vice President Henry R. Sutphen used this car daily. (PT Boats Inc.)

3. A great photo showing the many women that made up the Electrical Department at Elco. Prior to World War II, factories in the United States were turning out automobiles, large and small appliances, and children's' toys. A mere month after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, President Franklin D. Roosevelt ordered the establishment of the War Production Board. Its purpose was to convert the factories of peacetime industries into manufacturing plants for weapons and military equipment for the fight. These ladies were more then capable of working in this department which gave life to the little PT boats. (PT Boats Inc.)

3b. The first aid office, located inside Building 20. Many injuries that occurred in a wooden boat building plant consisted of sprains, abrasions, wood slivers, and eye injuries. The head of this department was Mr. Alexander, seen second from the left. Most medical problems could be handled here, but for more serious injuries, Elco workers would be sent to Dr. William Wiren, who had an office at 8th Street and Blvd in Bayonne. (Irwin Chase)

4. An often forgot about area at Elco was the Photo Lab. Here they would process aerial photographs of the boats, filmed testing operations, documented accidents, photographed the assembly personnel at work, photographed complete boat series, and any other Elco photographs that were needed. Several photographers were on staff, including the famous Marine photographer Morris Rosenfeld, who took many photo’s for the company. (Charles B. Jones.)

4b. A very rare look at the photographers that made up the photo Lab at Elco. They would take the vast majority of factory photo’s, and video that included assembly of the different boat classes in all of the plants departments. They also took the testing and underway photos of the boats. Here they are onboard PT-517 that is in the boat basin. (Irwin Chase)

5. Elco had their own Police Department which insured a high level of security in and around the Elco plant. They protected the facilities where boat materials were being produced. They patrolled other buildings, guarded gates, and enforced rules to ensure that the facilities were secure. Guards at Elco often received new forms of instruction in security, and many received new authority or were sworn in as special police officers. The man second on the left (white hat) is Glenville Tremaine, who oversaw this department as part of his regular duties. (PT Boats Inc.)

6. A look at the Sheet Metal Department workers. One might think with wooden boats, a sheet metal shop would not have a huge impact. By the 1940s, stainless steel and aluminum became more popular, cost-effective options. WWII helped take this trend to another level. The sheet metal shop was integral to producing prefabricated parts that were used in the construction of the boats. These parts were assembled with precision to meet the high standards required for wartime service. (PT Boats Inc.)

7. During World War II, hygiene in war plants was heavily emphasized through public health campaigns, mandatory hand washing, access to sanitation facilities like showers and toilets, and the use of disinfectants. Elco used posters and lectures to educate workers on proper hygiene practices like frequent hand washing. Regular medical checkups were often conducted to identify and address potential health issues. These lovely women workers are washing up in several hand washing stations at the plant. (Irwin Chase)

7b. Lt. Frank W. Rowe (second from right) was the Assistant Supervisor of Shipbuilding and it was he who would initiated, organized, established, and in October 1940 began operating a school at the Electric Boat Company, in Bayonne. This school was for familiarization and primary operational training of the officers and enlisted men, for the first established PT boat squadrons. More than 2500 officers and enlisted men would pass through this school. The school was located on 11 Schuyler Place in Bayonne. They are on the bow of one of the seventy-seven footers. (Heather Rowe)

8. These officers have made the trip to Elco from the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center. A steady flow of officers and sailors alike visited daily to see first hand the operations of building the very boats they would take to combat. (PT Boats Inc.)

8b. Navy Officers visiting the plant and learning first hand how metal products were being used on the boats. Elco felt it was very important that these officers learned how the boats were assembled, and could take the knowledge learned in an operating war time zone. (PT Boats Inc.)

9. A rare look into the Elco wet boat basin. Boats towed in here were in various stages of assembly. Three shifts of workers took care of the boats here for assembly of some weapons systems, ammo boxes, torpedo racks and other sub assemblies. Being brought here freed up space in the main assembly building, and allowed the wooden hulls to soak. Several boats you see here would later be placed with Squadron 4, based at Melville in Rhode Island to be used as training boats for students. This area did have heat in the winter months. (PT Boats Inc.)

10. Elco employees formed their own in house Fire Department. They were all highly trained by the Bayonne Fire Department in the use of fire hoses, fire extinguishers, and other fire apparatus in case of a fire. As Elco was a wooden boat building plant, they took great precautions in fire safety, doing weekly training sessions with the Fire Department. (PT Boats Inc.)

10b. Fire stations such as this one were strategically placed throughout the plant. They carried items such as fire extinguishers, axes, fire hoses, sand and more. Stations such as this one were instrumental in the case of fire, and could make the difference by having these emergency items on hand quickly. (PT Boats Inc.)

11. Here we see the welding department at Elco. Women workers are being trained on the proper techniques in soldering. The man in the white shirt is the welding foremen of the department. They are being shown how to heat with one hand and feeding filler in the other. Soldering is a process of joining two metal surfaces together using a filler called solder. The soldering process involves heating the surfaces to be joined and melting the solder, which is then allowed to cool and solidify, creating a strong and durable joint. (Charles B. Jones)

12. Workers in the main assembly area are working on the boats day room cabin, her forward chart house, and starboard side 50 caliber gun turret. The helm area has also been assembled here. The day room provided a space for crew to relax, but later would be used for berthing. The roof, outside panels and sides were made from mahogany plywood. The forward bulkhead panels, inside and out were made using birch plywood, with spruce frames with curved mahogany corners and covered on both sides with light plywood. The space between the frames in the superstructure is insulated with cork and the whole house is covered with airplane fabric, doped and painted. This will become PT-108 once her construction is completed. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

13. During the war years many slogans were made into posters and were seen just about everywhere. Here at the Packard Motor Car Company in Detroit, this Packard Marine Division employee holds up one of those signs. In back of him is one of the 4M-2500 Packard Marine engines used in the PT boats. (PT Boats Inc.)

14. Workers in a section of the joiner shop are busy measuring and fitting day room cabin and forward helm section of the boat. Employees that worked at Elco, during peacetime were woodworker’s who made doors, windows, and decorative finish work, such as cornices and mantels, balustrades, and railings. Their skills were unmatched in the work they performed at Elco. (PT Boats Inc.)

15. Here in the main assembly section, these workers have one of the boats center self sealing gasoline tanks set up in the over-head lift. They will be placing it under the boats day-room cabin in the bilges. The Elco boats had three tanks, a port wing tank a center tank and a starboard wing tank. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

16. Elco did not have any underground gasoline tanks on her property, large enough to fill up the PT boats. They had this fuel barge from Gulf Marine which was inside the boat basin. We are seeing the tail end of the fuel barge with a floating dock tide behind her. It’s not a big barge by today’s standards, with this one being 30’x 90/120’. The house on the barge is for pumps and generators, which is used for self propulsion. To the right of the barge on the dock is a security officer and one of the security booth’s over looking the water. (Irwin Chase.)

17. Elco Office employee Charles Waller (far right) was an executive assistant to the Works Manager, who at that time was Glenville Tremaine. He administered the issuance of initial authorization for production departments to proceed with all PT Boat construction, and conferred with reps from the Navy Department and Management. Charles had to study all contract specs and obtained data from the design agent. They are standing in front of PT-335. (Charles Waller)

18. Women workers on the hull are securing the planking. The fastenings to the main frames are Monel screws below the waterline and brass screws above and copper rivets or clinched nails were used for secondary fastenings. Due to the war requirements of copper, brass, and Monel, production completed after the summer of 1942, all fastenings were galvanized steel. (Irwin Chase)

19. Mechanical Engineer (left) and assembly worker are inside the helm of this 103 class Elco PT boat. They are looking over a piece of piping that will be connected inside the boats engine room. Fittings must be perfect so that no leaks develop while under the strain of combat. (PT Boats Inc.)

20. One of two Elco outdoor sheds which held a multitude of wood products used daily. The sheds were massive and also contained many other parts that were crucial to the assembly of the boats. These areas were high security as Elco police were stationed here at all times. Workers here had the responsibility to stock and maintain all boat parts and wood products which usually arrived by railway. (PT Boats Inc.)

21. Workers in the joiner shop are working on the inside of the boats day room cabin. Three workers are standing inside what will become the boats port side gun turret, which was attached to this cabin. This cabin was built of spruce frames with curved mahogany corners and covered on both sides with light plywood. The space between the frames in the superstructure was insulated with cork and the whole cabin covered with airplane fabric, doped and painted. (Irwin Chase)

22. Mahogany wood that has been laminated with a resin glue process is being locked together in a mold. From here it will go to the baking oven and heated to 140 degrees for two hours. New gluing techniques back then were able to withstand the salt air and water. They represented a great advancement in the building of wooden boats. (Naval War College Archives)

22b. After being removed from the oven, the frame is removed. Here one of the workers is sawing the wood into two identical pieces. In this photo you can see the many lamination's, with the wood and glue bound together like steel. Planning rollers will bring the width down to precise specifications. (Naval War College Archives)

23. This worker is operating what was known as a pin router. This was a woodworking machine where the cutting bit is guided by a small, vertically adjustable "pin" that follows the contours of a template, allowing for precise copying of shapes onto a work piece, often used for creating decorative reliefs, custom-fitted recesses, and signs; essentially, it's a specialized router that uses a template with a guiding pin to create exact replicas of shapes. (Irwin Chase)

24. This worker is operating a 25 ton punch press. The punch comes down through the metal and meets with a matching die. Those larger flanged holes were done in the same manner. Those dimpled holes reduce weight and increase rigidity. The operator is using a foot peddle and engages a clutch on that flywheel to punch a quick clean hole. (PT Boats Inc.)

24b. One of the boats salt water outlet pipes can be seen here. These would be attached to the exhaust pipe outlets above the mufflers at the stern. They dumped into the inboard side of the exhaust outlet, around the outlet jacket, then into water jackets on the outboard side of the mufflers then into the mufflers. Mufflers were in the open position when the engines were started, and were open all the time above 1200 rmp. These outlet pipes were closed when the boat did not want to be detected and the exhaust was driven below the surface of the water. (Irwin Chase)

25. Workers in the main assembly area are working on one of the boats chart house cabin structures. They are stretching air plane cloth over the entire area which will then have glue applied under heat to insure that no leaks occur.

(PT Boats Inc.)

26. These drills were a common heavy duty type used at Elco. They had large Jacobs chuck’s, with the shaft having a cutting or honing head to align the bore. It also had a clutch to prevent injuring the operator using it, when taking too much of a bite. This was a custom tool used for drilling out the openings for the boats three propeller shafts. These Elco workers are installing the Starboard Propeller Shaft through the propeller strut, through the cut-less bearing, into the shaft log, and finally into the engine room. Once the other end of the shaft is inside the engine room, the keyed coupling flange can be installed onto the end of the shaft. This whole procedure takes about 4 people to man-handle the heavy monel prop shaft into the correct position and involves using a lot of lubrication (grease or tallow) and then twisting, pulling, and pushing! Only then can the shaft and coupling alignment process begin. It takes several hours to complete the process for three shafts. (PT Boats Inc.)

26b. This special wax machine was used for shaft seals (stuffing boxes) using Rope that is impregnated with wax. The water exposure from underneath the boat keeps the seal cool enough that the wax won’t melt under friction of the shaft spinning, assuming that the “packing nut” (or gland) on the inside of the shaft isn’t tightened too much. The packing nut was tightened to a certain tension on the wax rope to only allow a very slow drip. If the packing nut is too tight, it creates too much friction on the wax rope, then and the wax melts and the rope seal will leak and have to be removed, replaced and then properly re-tightened. (PT Boats Inc.)

27. The massive hull is in the stages of being turned over. This innovation made it so much easier for workers to work on the hull from above rather than a cramped position below. Once turned over assembly above deck will begin. These workers were responsible for all boat turning and the hook up to the over head wenches as turning straps needed to be placed in strategic areas. At this stage, the hull weighs in at 12 tons. (PT Boats Inc.)

28. Elco worker is shown with a long handled iron. This tool was used on the hull to heat the glue used to impregnate the wood. PT Boats were made waterproof by constructing their hulls with a double layer of mahogany planks, with a layer of glue-impregnated canvas sandwiched between them, essentially creating a watertight seal; this design allowed for a lightweight yet strong hull that could be easily repaired if damaged. This long handled iron made it easier to reach areas of the hull. (Irwin Chase)

28b. This Women is winding motor armatures. The armature is an integral part of the motor (or generator), as this is the component that carries the alternating current (AC) in an electric machine. The armature conducts AC, even on Direct current (DC) machines using the commutator (which reverses current direction every so often) or due to electronic commutation. Armatures are comprised of a number of components. These parts include the core, the winding, the commutator and the shaft. (Naval War College Archives)

29. One of several tool cribs at Elco. This crib carried everything from sanders and routers to electrical screwdrivers to skill saws. Workers would check out the tools they were using for each shift, giving the tool crib staff a bronze tag with their employee number on it. In this way they would know who had what tool and who took it out. (Irwin Chase)

29b. Hull Department Carpenter in the main assembly plant is making his way down the step ladder to begin his noon time lunch break. Although tools were provided by the company, many had their own tool boxes and tools used in the construction for wooden boats. Notice the sneaker type shoes he is wearing, which provided a non slip bottom. The BP scaffolding system was adjustable which permitted unobstructed working space on any tier when framing, planking, or painting. The scaffolding was made for Elco by the Bergen Point Iron Works of Bayonne, New Jersey. (PT Boats Inc.)

30. This women worker is operating what was called a nibbler machine. Nibbling is a cutting process which uses a punch to cut multiple holes in the work piece. These holes overlap, meaning that larger areas of material can be removed by nibbling along the desired profile outline. (PT Boats Inc.)

31. The Elco Sheet Metal shop produced the many parts needed to complete the assembly of the boats. In this 1943 photo, this women worker is busy operating a press brake machine. It was used to bend sheet metal or other materials into a desired shape. It consists of a stationary lower die or "bed" and a movable upper die or "punch" that presses the material into the lower die, creating the bend. It was commonly used in sheet metal fabrication, metalworking, and manufacturing to produce a variety of bent metal parts and components. (Irwin Chase)

31b. The fabric or upholstery shop at Elco, made many items for the boats. Here they would construct seat cushions, bunk cushions, and cushions for the Officers quarters and crews quarters. Before being hired at Elco, many of the women were seamstresses before the war. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

31c. With men going off to war, Elco took up the slack with hiring many Women workers. Here these workers are in training, and learning how to correctly hammer, rivet, sand, and work on the boats hulls and planking. (Irwin Chase)

32. This worker in Building 21 is using a bandsaw. That skinny blade makes it easier to cut curves and details. It had a long, flexible blade made of toothed metal that was used to cut materials. They were versatile and could perform a variety of tasks, such as ripping lumber, cutting curves, and making veneer. (Irwin Chase)

32b. Another part of the assembly process was the drilling and placement for the boats three bronze struts. The struts are a key part of a boat's design, supporting the propellers and affecting how water hits them. This can impact the boat's performance and noise levels. The strongest struts are usually made of cast silicone bronze or commercial bronze Using a power drill and template, placement locations had to be 100% accurate. (Irwin Chase)

33. PT-375 has been towed into the wet boat basin. Here weapons systems, ammo boxes, torpedo racks, and other sub assembly took place. In this photo clearances are being checked for the starboard side 50 caliber machine gun mount, as well as the view from the helm area looking forward. (PT Boats Inc.)

34. Elco’s oldest employee, Frederick Bulkeley (right) was hired on April 16, 1942. When Bulkeley tried to enlist in the Navy, he was told that he was too old. Newspaper’s in the Bayonne area carried this story and shortly after, Bulkeley received over 200 offers for employment. At 76 years of age Bulkeley went to work doing his inspection job, as well as promotional work for the company. Here he inspects one of the boats helm wheels. Frederick's son was the famous Lt. John D. Bulkeley who was awarded the Medal of Honor for his work with MTB Squadron 3 in the Philippines, early in the war. (Charles B. Jones)

34b. Foremen and workers in the sheet metal department are being trained in the art of welding techniques. (Irwin Chase)

35. Workers are using a pleasant day outdoors to Rivet the large girders used on the boats. These girders provided maximum strength and stability in all types of weather the boats might encounter. (Irwin Chase)

35b. This worker is running a Baxter Whitney table spindle molding machine. It had two blades that clamped into the head, and would cut different shapes or slots into the timber, these machines can run up to, or even over 2,2000 RPM. (Irwin Chase)

36. Employee checking out one of the Goodrich Cutless Bearing containers. These were a water lubricated, rubber-based shaft bearing. The bearings were used at the aft end of the boats shaft tube, to support the propeller shaft. (Charles B. Jones)

36b. This employee is using a hand powered drill with a long shaft bit to drill the hole for the eye towing and installation gear. This installation was completed on the bow of the boat. The eye towing gear was essential should the boat need to be towed after damage in battle, or upon engine failure.(Irwin Chase)

37. Scandinavian worker Olav Nilson. Olav worked at Elco for many years and worked on the keels of the PT boats, using an adz to shape and cut the keel of each PT boat. Elco had hired one other Scandinavian worker that also worked on the boats keels. Olav stayed with the company until it closed in 1948. (PT Boats Inc.)

38. Workers are making measurements and adjustments to the starboard side gun turret depressor rails. Machine gun limiting stops of brass or steel tubing was fitted as required to prevent accidental firing into the boat or occupants on the bridge. The 0".50 Mount, Mark 17 Mod. 1 was a hand-operated machine-gun mount, carrying two caliber 0.50 Browning aircraft machine guns. Each boat carried two mounts starboard and port side. Two canvas covers were provided for .50 cal. machine gun mounts to completely enclose guns, mounts, and limiting stops. After turret had a separate spray shield to the height of limiting stop.

All canvas covers and life preservers received the approved treatment for fire retardant. (PT Boats Inc.)

38b. This worker from the Paint Shop is spraying the hull of the boat. The hull was first primed and finished with three coats formula 511 special haze gray, with the final coat in accordance with latest Elco instructions. The bottom was also primed with copper bottom enamel, fastening holes cemented with surfacing putty and finished with two coats copper bottom enamel. (PT Boats Inc.)

39. Women workers from the Electrical Assembly Department are busy wiring electrical boards. The first two women on the first bench closets to the camera are installing RPM and Manifold Pressure gauges to the boats main helm control panel. (PT Boats Inc.)

39b. This worker is under the hull adjusting one of the three struts for the boats shafts and propellers. Struts played a very important part in the design of the boat. They support the propellers, and also affect the way the water hits the propeller, which can have a significant impact on performance and noise. These struts were made of unpainted manganese bronze with three fitted to each boat. (PT Boats Inc.)

40. A rare look at the backside of the Elco plant, which had a rail line coming into the property. Daily freight cars would be unloaded here at this platform for many dropping off hundreds of supplies needed for the boats. Smoke generators would be filled here at this location and then brought out to the assembly area for placement on the boats. (PT Boats Inc.)

40b. Elco would build their own Cafeteria for workers, making it more efficient for three shifts of workers to get a sit down meal. Access to a good meal at the factory cafeteria was crucial for maintaining worker morale, especially with long hours and demanding work conditions. Although no evidence was found at Elco, "Victory Gardens" were sometimes planted right on the factory grounds to help combat food rationing. These gardens were specifically intended to provide fresh vegetables. Here some of those workers and cooks have made a cake for one of their own.

41. With the development of the Elco Turret (Thunderbolt), they would construct a new building in 1943. This would become Building 29 where these turrets would be assembled. The turret housed four 20mm cannons. It was a single-person electric powered turret that went through several iterations. These turrets boasted a remarkable capability where a single operator could unleash a formidable barrage of bullets towards approaching enemy targets. (PT Boats Inc.)

41b. Inside building 29, workers on the assembly line are working on the carriage mounts which will house the 20mm cannons. To the right a shop foreman is inspecting the work, while other assembly, like adding the operators seat is being completed. This photo is from the restart of the Mark 15 Mod 1 Elco Turret production line in 1945. Elco had delivered 26 of these updated mounts to the Navy. These were being produced for the Invasion of Japan combatants. Production had been halted (suspended date was December 4, 1943) for approximately 8 months in 1944 in order to evaluate the design and provide changes. Updates continued during the restart. (PT Boats Inc.)

41c. A look at the Elco turret (Thunderbolt) system showing the four 20mm cannons. Yet to be added are the gun site and operators seat. Other components will be added to complete the turret, but the reader will get a true sense of what this system looked like before being mounted on a few of the boats. Original order from the Bureau of Ordnance called for 200 of these mounts to be constructed, but on May 5, 1945 this was downgraded to 120. (PT Boats Inc.)

42. After touring the boats chart house and crews quarters, Ensign Eliabeth Gardner, USNR makes her way topside. Gardner was in the administrative support and PR with the Navy. This is one of the newly built 500 class Elco PT boats, sitting in the boat basin in front of Building 21. (Irwin Chase)

43. In August of 1945, Elco was winding down from the war. They had several hulls in different phases of construction that were canceled. They had to do something with these hulls, and set about cutting them up. Here in Building 21 workers are sawing the hulls in sections for removal. (Charles B. Jones.)

43b. With the hulls cut up into sections, they were trucked outside of the plant and then hauled to an undisclosed location for burning. Here we see the hulls which have been placed onto small carts on wheels, where they await removal from the plant. (Charles B. Jones.)