;

The Lighter Side of War

With any company the product that gets produced, can be measured by the people that produce it. Elco was no different and during the war years, those workers had an incredible appetite for patriotism.

They were building the little PT Boats and were doing their very best to rush these little Midget Sluggers to the war zone. Elco had a long standing tradition in wooden boat building, and many of the pre-war workers were obtained to continue their excellent work. It was felt that Elco produced the greatest of the wooden boats before the war, and their reputation followed them into World War Two.

With so many workers running three shifts, it was felt they needed something more to take their minds off of the rugged task of building boats. Elco’s Labor Management would have the task of providing an escape of the every day rigors of their jobs.

The Labor Management committee was formed at Elco around April of 1942, it’s efforts promoting maximum production of the PT boats, and at the same time, endeavoring to combine safe, healthful, and congenial working conditions. The committee combined four Labor representatives and four Management representatives. Their combined efforts through the war years brought about splendid teamwork.

First they added suggestion boxes and placed them in all locker rooms, and shop departments, for all workers to submit ideas in monthly competition to improve production, save materials, conservation of tools, and equipment. Workers enjoyed this and Management awarded prizes of First prize, $25.00 War Bond; Second prize $10.00 War Bond; Third prize $5.00 War Stamps, with duplication of awards if necessary. A certificate of award accompanied each prize. Suggestions also had a chance to be submitted to the War Production Board at Washington and receive national recognition with “Meritorious Award” certificates which were handed to the winners.

Elco was awarded the Army and Navy “E” Flag for high efficiency through cooperation from all of the departments. They would received this award six times during the war years.

Another morale booster for the employees was the War Service fund Committee. They put out the word about fun packages with money collected, directly from the Elco employees. They were able to pack and ship razor blades, candy, writing paper, shaving cream, and special Army/Navy pencils. These items went directly to the Elco boat squadrons in the war zone.

Another fine program was the Apprenticeship program, which would be awarded to many Elco employees since its inception in May of 1941. This program was done to help with plant production. They would embark on a two year schedule of training, the school work, and study accomplished at the Vocational High School in Bayonne, and the actual mechanics work put into practice at the plant. Many of the well trained men became full fledged mechanics serving in the many shops at the plant.

Transportation problems for the many Elco employees were many and varied, particularly those who relied on gasoline for their motive power. The drastic curtailment of gasoline had been at times critical for the war effort. Thanks to Elco management, gasoline was always available to Elco employees, to the extent of their OPA award, at the gas station assigned exclusively for Electric Boat Company War workers. It was a unique arrangement, coupled up with car pooling and riding, and assisting employees with their applications for gasoline and tires.

During the summer months, many successful programs were arranged, with lively noonday crowds of employees, who would gather around the outdoor band-stand on such occasions as Flag Day, Fourth of July, War Bond rallies, Suggestion rallies, and Army and Navy E Awards. These rallies included many prominent speakers, Navy and Army officers, and heroes; Metropolitan Opera Stars, and particular emphasis on Commander John D. Bulkeley, USN. Many programs included plant talent such as the singing Elcoettes, three lovely Elco employees, and Labor Management speakers and presentations of certificates of award.

Elco also presented Noontime Educational Films. These films with sound provided yet another way for employees to relax. These films showed the world wide events of the times and showed the daring deeds of our boys at the front. Labor Management also had on display in Washington D.C., in February 1944, two outstanding posters called “The Wheel of Success” and The Pinnacle of Production”, which attracted nationwide publicity for Elco.

Monday musicals were another way for employees to relax and enjoy vocal talent from Elco employees. These weekly events were done on the outdoor band stand, weather permitting. Many of the vocal talent were trained under the supervision of Messers, P. Harding, and E McCurdy. In addition to the vocal talent their were also an array of musicians who shared in these programs.

Elco employees also had what was known as the Red Cross Drive, which raised considerable money for the Bayonne Chapter of the American National Red Cross. Money raised was given to the fighting allies.

There was great enthusiasm at Elco when Labor Management formed Sports teams. One of the very popular ways to relax and have fun was playing baseball. A field was constructed, adjoining Building 21 (main assembly) for use during noontime and after working hours. Elco also formed softball teams playing in the Industrial league. Elco would win their first championship in 1941. This would be Elco’s first championship for the mens softball team. Elco would win the championship again in 1942 and 1944. Trophies and sweaters were handed out to the winners.

Elco would also form a basketball team, winning the 1941-42 Championship. They played in the Hudson County Amateur Athletic League, and gathered the top spot in the payoffs by beating General Cable Company in the finals. Early basketball courts were rarely perfectly smooth. Knee pads were standard equipment to prevent severe injuries from protruding nails, splinters, uneven planking, and other potentially dangerous defects in court flooring, which were even played outdoors.

Probably the highest turnout of employees was for the Inter Departmental League Bowling teams. Many teams formed were from different departments, consisting of teams from the Plumbing, Engine, Sheet Metal, Machine, Control, Boat Builders, Riggers, Joiners, Electrical, and Store Room Departments. Thirty-two teams comprising of some 160 players, would play their games at the Playdrome, at Union City. They played at over 32 bowling alleys. Women also made up several of the teams.

Elco also played benefit games to support the War Service Fund. One basketball game in particular was played at the Bayonne Junior High School between some of the Long Island hometown boys, and Elco’s 1944 Industrial Champions. Over 400 tickets were sold for the event, with Elco winning 60-38. They raised $176.00 for the Service Fund.

Later in 1945, Golf would become another pastime for employees. Although the supply of golf clubs was curtailed for the war effort, there was roughly 30 employees out on the links, during some of the outings.

Elco also set up many parties, complete with dancing. Elco workers would attend barn dances, held at Mackenzie Post on Avenue E Bayonne, New Jersey. Guests would listen to country music and even square dance to live music of the day. Barn dances and social events like this, helped boost the morale of workers. These dances weren't just for fun—they helped workers cope with the emotional toll of war and reminded them of the strength of community. They also attended engagement, Halloween, and Christmas parties as well.

Elco workers enjoyed their annual outing as well, where they would board buses, heading to fun places. Outdoor games were played, complete with hot dogs, hamburgs, and other good food. Later they would head to the Pavonia Yacht Club in Bayonne, New Jersey, to enjoy a dinner, and play golf.

War Bond rallies were an important part of the makeup of the Elco Naval Division. Bond drives in many states to help raise money to build PT boats was a common practice. When they did raise enough funds, a ceremony at the plant took place and that boat was put on display.

One of the highlights for the company was the awarding of the 4th Army Navy award for excellence and the World premiere of the short film “Devil Boats”. This ceremony and showing was held on August 22, 1944, at the Dewitt Theater, Bayonne, New Jersey. Over 2,800 Elco employees and invited guests attended this special night. The American Legion Band of Richmond County, provided a concert as guest’s were arriving. This short film was created by Warner Brothers with Elco’s express permission. It remained a highlight for those employees that toiled long hours building these boats, something they were very proud of.

The “Salvage For Victory” campaign asked that all Americans do their part in supporting the new war effort by collecting, saving, conserving, and recycling materials that could be repurposed for military uses. In Bayonne and New York, mayors were asked to save the same kinds of materials from municipal dumps and incinerators. In Bayonne, the Department of Sanitation began picking up materials on an alternating schedule with regular garbage collection. Elco had workers from the plant in being the nights special Bar Tenders to help raise money and awareness of the program.

One special lunch time entertainment was honoring Commander John D. Bulkeley, USN. He addressed the employees and revealed how well the PT boats were doing in the war zone, and that their boats and hard work was paying off. Frederick Bulkeley, who was an inspector at the plant and the Commander’s father participated in the exercises, during which Commander Bulkeley was presented a model of his famous PT-41, in which he rode in the Philippines. This beautiful model was made by Elco employee Don Rosencrantz. PT-41 was the boat in which General MacArthur was taken from the Philippines, before the invading Japanese forces overtook the island.

It was by 1945 that Elco would have their 7th War Bond Drive, collecting some $14,000,000 dollars. Due to past performances this drive was featured by rallies, posters, publicity, and speeches. Thousands of dollars were set aside each pay day through payroll savings. Co-operation of activities by Labor and Management, helped Elco reach their goals over the years, for the war effort.

The Elco Works Employees Association was incorporated under the State laws of New Jersey, on July 1, 1937, as a Union for collective bargaining purpose with the Elco Naval Division of the Electric Boat Company. During the war years, the association brought to the employees, a strong union, with a clause in 1943, covering the men who entered the Armed Forces. This was prior to the GI Bill of Rights.

One interesting form of fun for the employees was Horse Shoe Pitching. It was set up below the Elco cafeteria, close to the south railroad fence. Many employees used their lunch hour to get some fresh air and play this fun game. It was decided that the two best employees playing this game were Wilbur Bowman, and Jim Dunlop.

More fun was added when a ten cent dance was held at the American Legion in Bayonne. For ten cents you could get a dance with a pretty lady, and in this case the girls were workers at the plant. The money raised for this type of dance were placed into the war relief fund or to raise money for war bonds. Also a mock jail was set up, and you had to get raised funds to get out of Jail.

The Labor Management Committee did an incredible job of providing vast escapes from the everyday life, of building boats. Employees could do many recreational forms of enjoyment, and it was because of this that Elco had employees that worked hard to produce Uncle Sam’s PT boats. It was President Roosevelt who pointed out that Human Beings could not sustain, continued hard work, for very long without proper balance between work on one hand, and vacation and recreation on the other. Elco workers, both men and women for whom adequate recreation provision was made, returned in better condition to meet their tasks. Elco knew that their workers were pretty much all alike, in their relish of the golden moments for relaxing play, when that time card was punched and the work shift ended.