Chapter Two Photo Descriptions

1. Construction on the first series seventy-seven footers in Building 21. Workers are adding spruce diagonal frames on the hull sides and longitudinal battens on the bottom are, notched into the main frames and fastened with brass screws. Intermediate frames between the main frames are similarly installed in the three forward compartments. From these wooden strips, the first layer of Mahogany planking will be added. Workers crawl over the hull, which as you notice is built upside down, to make it easier to work on the hull. When the hull is completed it will be turned right side up. (Gene Kirkland) (Irwin Chase)

2. Workers are applying the first layer of Mahogany planking, now that the batton strips have been completed. The planking is in two layers both made of mahogany boards 6 inches wide. Both layers above the chine are 3/8 inch thick; on the bottom, the inner layer is 3/8 inch, the outer layer 7/16 inch. The two layers are laid on diagonally opposite to each other with sheets of airplane fabric laid in marine glue in-between. The planks are fastened to the main frames below the water line with monel screws and above the waterline with brass screws. The fastenings to the diagonals, battens, intermediate frames and securing the planks to each other where there are no frames are copper nails riveted over burrs. (Irwin Chase)

2b. Inside the main assembly building looking East, we see the hulls now turned over. Work has begun on the decks and the boats are all in different phases of assembly. The main deck frames are notched, spruce deck longitudinal s are screwed in place and later, a 5/8-inch mahogany plywood deck is put on. The deck is secured to the hull with plywood knees between each frame. The knees are bolted to the deck and to the covering board on top, and to the planking, gunwale, and guard clamp on the sides. An oak rub strake outside the gunwale and an oak chine guard make the outer hull work complete. (Irwin Chase)

3. A nice look into the assembly phase of these first series boats. The boat to the left has it’s starboard side torpedo tubes in place, and torpedo training gear being assembled into place. Notice the boat has the hydraulically powered Plexiglas-domed Dewandre turrets, being installed on the boats at this time. The open hatch leads down into the boats engine room. (Gene Kirkland)

4. The first of the seventy-seven footers, PT-20 has been gently put into the boat basin, and sits in front of Building 21. The boat was the prototype for the first series of seventy-seven footers. She would retain several features of the seventy- footers, including the turrets and engine room canopy. PT-20 introduced decking which was a layer of mahogany plywood some 3/16 of an inch thick, used to improve stiffness. There were two series of 77 foot boats, the first being PT-20-44. The second series would be PT-45-68. This boat would be stationed at Pearl Harbor on December 7th 1941, and later stationed at Midway Island. (Irwin Chase)

4b. Members of the Elco team along with members from NBC, will begin their broadcast to highlight PT-20, the first seventy-seven foot boat off the assembly line. The ceremony was broadcast to Bayonne New Jersey as well as New York. As she was the first of the Elco seventy-seven foot boats, she would soon prove her ability at the upcoming plywood derby, that she was built for speed and maneuverability. In the center of the photo is Lt. F. W. Rowe, the Assistant Supervisor of Ship Building for Elco. (Irwin Chase)

4c. One of the first series 77 footers is under her own power and is returning from a trial run. She has entered the break water, heading to the Elco dock. The trial crews and other engineers ran several predetermined tests before the boats would be turned over to the Navy. Behind the boat we see the old Newark Bay Railroad Bridge, which had a vertical lift section which were a pair of two-track spans over two separate shipping channels. During the war the bridge was a critical piece of the Port of New York and New Jersey’s logistic network, allowing 300 or more trains per day to run. (Irwin Chase)

4d. PT-30 is lined up for the first nicknamed “Plywood Derby” on July 24, 1941. It was set up by the Board of Inspection. They would run this test to observe not only the speed of the boats, but the sea keeping and structural qualities. Elco would enter PT’s 20, 30, 31, and 33. The derby was scheduled for waters off New London, Connecticut, and the course would be some 190 miles at full throttle in open sea. Elco would capture top honors in the sea run as PT-20 crossed the finish line first with a 39.72 knot average. PT-31 was second insuring an Elco victory, with 37.01 knots. Other tests such as maneuverability tests and running with a full war load were completed. (Irwin Chase)

5. Here we see a photo with work on the second series hull taking shape, as the frames have been put in place. The frames are built of wood braced with plywood angles. A cabin truck structure is in the air, suspended by the pulley system, after completion in the upper mezzanine area. When completed they were lowered to the assembly room floor for attachment to the boats. (Irwin Chase)

5b. In the main Building 21 area, we see the second series seventy-seven foot boats in varying degrees of hull assembly. Workers are installing the baton strips on the hull with which the planked mahogany will be attached. To the left is the machine shop where sub assemblies took place. These assemblies could then be easily brought to the assembly floor. (Irwin Chase)

5c. Workers on the assembly room are working inside the boats forward canopy structure. The canopy is framed with spruce with all corners and angle joints made of mahogany and fastened with screws and glue. The frame is covered, inside and out, with light plywood which is secured with glue. The voids between frames are filled with rubber insulating material. (Irwin Chase)

6. Three of the second series boats in the assembly building. To the left PT-59, PT-58, and PT-67. Notice PT-59 has installed a loop on the top of the cabin. This was an R.D.F. or Radio Direction Finder. As the boats were small and operated at night, the sources of signals would be radio beacon stations or light vessels. The RDF however did not find favor as it was constantly needing attention to the calibrations, and the magnetic forces which existed on the boats had a disturbing effect on incoming signals. This would not find favor and would be removed from the boats. (Gene Kirkland)

6b. A wonderful look at two of the second series boats. One boat has been hooked into the dockside crane, and shortly will be gently placed into the boat basin. The other boat has been brought over to the concrete roadway and awaits here turn. Both boats have much sub assemblies that need to be completed and will be towed over to the wet boat basin. Another boat is inside the outdoor boat shed to the left of this photo. (Irwin Chase)

7. A look inside the port side pilot house of PT-59. In this area would be the boats quartermaster that was in charge of all charts. He would plot courses here, and maintain the boats radio communications. He was in charge of all call signs and maintained the compass, and RDF equipment. Semaphore equipment would be kept here including the boats binoculars. (Gene Kirkland)

7b. Starboard side looking forward inside the pilot house of PT-47. Take note that the photo was taken in 1945, so the place is not too ship shape, with equipment already having been removed. The door to the right would lead to the forward crews quarters. Notice the control panel just under the counter, which was duplicate controls from the main bridge. (Gene Kirkland)

8. Inside the pilot house we see the charts and chart table. From the looks of things this officer is very busy trying to plot a course. At the time, the boat was in Martha’s Vineyard and the Block Island area, and was with the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center. Usually a list of call signs and other information that would be useful to the Captain and the boat, was kept in this location. (Charles B. Jones)

8b. A look inside the helm area of this second series boat, shows a bit larger structure than what was on the 70 foot boats. The wheel has a suicide handle for better control during high speed turns. Above the grab rail from left we see the search light, bell, binnacle, throttle controls, and the base for the torpedo director. Above the windshield we see the RDF, or Range Direction Finder. To the left on the cabin bulkhead, is the torpedo firing buttons, which are covered by canvas. The door to the right leads to the pilot house and forward crews quarters. (Charles B. Jones)

9. A look inside the port-side crews quarters. As one can see the area was not very large but very comfortable. In this photo we see the crews bunk area with the upper bunks being able to swing up when not in use. Water proof cushions complete the lower bunks. You get a good look at the crew locker area for stowing personnel gear, and the aluminum flooring plates, which could be lifted to clean the bilges. They were painted with a non slip material. Crews quarters was on both sides of the forward bow. (Irwin Chase)

10. Starboard side view of the PT-59 looking forward. Top bunks (also known as sette berths) as well as lower berths for the crew were here. The top bunks held by support chains could be unhinged and raised if needed. Through the open door was the boats water closet and sinks for the crew. Their was also a hatch that led to the forecastle of the boat. Storage of items was common in this area forward. (Gene Kirkland)

11. A look at the small but functional Galley area onboard PT-59. The galley was located in the crews quarters separated by a dividing partition. The galley had a stove and sink area, and a place to keep dishes in a rack. They had a folding table for the crew to eat their meals. To the right of the sink is a small refrigerator that would keep some food stuffs cold. (Gene Kirkland)

12. This is the officers quarters on PT-59, and as one can see they were a pretty confining area. Two bunks made up the area for the Captain and Executive officer. The area had cabinet space for clothing and other necessary items. This photo shows the area looking forward on the port-side of the boat. Mattresses have been removed. (Gene Kirkland)

13. A look at the three 4M-2500 Packard Marine engines in the engine room, looking aft. These three engines would drive the boats three-bladed screws. The center engine was direct drive, with the two wings engines connected to vee drives. The engines were 1350 HP super-charged gasoline engines. The cooling water and lubricating oil in the engines were cooled by use of a heat ex changer in which the cooling medium was sea water. The engines gave the boats a top speed of 41 knots, but this was with a clean bottom. After being in action for several months, the speed would drop quite a bit due to bottom fouling, and general wear and tear on the engines. (Gene Kirkland)

14. The Dewandre Turrets that were installed on the 77 foot boats from PT-20-44, carried two 50 caliber aircraft machine guns. The power for operating the turret was compressed air at relatively low pressure, needing small pipes and fittings. The air transmits pressure using oil as the hydraulic medium. These mounts were completely automatic, as gunner’s had only to manipulate the gun, to aim at the target when the turret and the yoke follow all the movements of the gun sufficiently, so that the aim can be kept on the target all the time. The draw back to these mounts was they would become useless if power were interrupted. They had a tendency to fog up while firing, causing limited visibility, and the tracking of this automatic weapon was too slow for the fighters they might encounter. These enclosed turrets were discontinued beginning with PT-45. (Glenville Tremaine)

14b. A look at the Bludworth Marine Direction finder. This device was scheduled for installation on PT-68. The direction finder was basically used for determining the direction of the source of a radio signal. A direction finder (DF) can be used as a navigational aid. This is accomplished by measuring the direction (bearing) of at least two transmitters whose locations are already known.These devices were provided to Elco by the Simplex Bludworth Marine Instrument Company of New York. (PT Boats Inc.)

15. With the removal of the Dewandre mounts beginning with PT-45, we see the newer style replacement twin 50 caliber turret mount, in action on an unidentified Elco 77-footer. These mounts were manufactured by Colt, this particular mount was a simple manually operated Scarff-ring system. The Scarff ring was a type of machine gun mounting developed during the First World War. It allowed the gunner standing in an open gun tub to swivel and elevate his weapon quickly, and easily fire in any direction. The draw back was the small ammo boxes, which did not hold sufficient rounds that would be needed. (PT Boats, Inc.)

15b. Nice view looking aft, shows the side by side gunner arrangement on the Elco 77 foot boat. This boat is still carrying the colt style twin 50 caliber machine gun mounts, using the scarff ring system. This would be changed to incorporate a better mount and increased sized ammo boxes, which would hold more ammunition. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

16. The boats could carry four 21 inch MK-VIII torpedoes. These torpedoes were fired electronically from the cockpit area, or by percussion at the rear of the torpedo tube, on top of the impulse chamber, should the circuit fail. Each tube had a metal dome that protected the torpedo from letting in salt water. These would be removed before firing. The torpedo was fired by using a black powder charge that when ignited would shoot the torpedo from their greased MK-18 tube. The torpedoes each had a 466 pound TNT warhead with a range of about 16,000 yards, at roughly 36 knots. These torpedoes were actually introduced in the first world war. (Irwin Chase)

16b. This photo shows what happens, if the skipper pressed the button to fire the torpedo and nothing happens: At that point an Emergency percussion firing happens which is when personnel stationed at the tubes, strike the torpedo impulse chamber firing pin with a mallet, upon the order to fire torpedoes. It was standard practice to use this method of firing, whether electrical firing circuits were working or not. Here is one of the best photos showing the torpedo impulse chamber and the white button that would have been hit with a mallet to discharge the torpedo. Here you can clearly see in this photo the mallet held by this Sailor ready to strike that button for the impulse chamber. The humid climate of the Pacific would sometimes cause these charges to misfire, by not putting enough force behind the torpedo to fully eject it from the tube. Of course this method was only used on the boats when they had MK-18 tubes, and the MK-VIII torpedoes.(Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

17. A look at the standard 20mm Oerlikon cannon. This would be installed at the factory, beginning with the second series boats. Early installation included the MK-4 heavy destroyer pedestal mount. This weapon was drum fed and the canister held 60 rounds of high explosive shells and tracers. It had a range of 4,000 yards and was rated to fire at a rate of 450 rounds per minute. This cannon was used as an anti-aircraft weapon, which as heavier guns were introduced, would be moved to the bow of the boat. (Irwin Chase)

18. Here we see the early MK-II smoke generator which had two tanks. The smaller CO2 tank is upright at the head of the Titanium Tetra chloride tank and towards the center line. These smoke generators proved as much importance to the boats survival as did the weapons onboard. Laying smoke from the stern smoke generator which used Titanium tetra chloride which was a colorless, non-flammable, corrosive liquid. In contact with damp air it hydrolyzes readily, resulting in a dense white smoke. Hiding behind this smoke saved many a PT boat from being spotted by enemy ships. This early style smoke generator was used on some of the Elco 77 footers. (Irwin Chase)

18b. The replacement for the early MK-II smoke generator was the Type C mount. Instead of two tanks, it was only one 35 gallon bottle mounted on the stern. It could be refilled, but could also be released and thrown into the ocean to confuse a chasing enemy destroyer. These generators could produce smoke from two minutes up to twenty-five minutes. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

19. A wonderful look at this Elco 77 footer as she has opened up her smoke generator. Notice the thick white smoke being made behind her, enough to hide the boat should she run into enemy ships. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

20. A look the depth charges available to the boats. The boats could carry four 21 inch torpedoes, and in some instances the aft torpedo tubes were removed, and depth charges were put into their place. They measured 27.625 inches long. Mark 6 and Mark 6 Mod. 1 each weighed 420 pounds complete-and are 17.625 inches in diameter. The deadly depth charges, thought to be used against subs, but more than once were used to drop in front of oncoming Japanese Destroyers, and used to sink stubborn enemy craft that would not sink with gun fire alone. Depth charges used to sink barges were seldom done, but it was tried. (Charles B. Jones)

21. A look at one of the changes to the turrets of the boats. These newer MK-17 mounts provided ammunition to the guns supplied from four boxes, two per gun, each having a capacity of 250 rounds, or 500 rounds per gun. This was a large upgrade from the former colt style mount. Canvas cover’s were provided that fit over the open tops of two adjacently-placed ammunition boxes. The carriage of the mount provides unlimited train, which was accomplished by the operator exerting pressure, in the direction desired, on a winged back rest attached to the rotating carriage. The other noticeable change to the mount was around the guns, an aluminum combination spray shield- gun depression system, which kept the gunners from shooting into their own boats. (Charles B. Jones)

22. A nice look at this 77 footer which is docked at the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center. Notice the MK-17 machine gun mounts with the aluminum combination spray shield-gun depression system. You get a good look at the starboard side MK-18 torpedo tube, and impulse chamber at the back of the tube. The open sliding wooden hatch to the left of the photo leads down into the boats engine room. (Charles B. Jones)

23. Stern starboard side view of this seventy-seven footer, showing the 4 ventilators that will help bring in fresh air below decks. We also see the rear view of the forward MK-18 torpedo tube and the impulse chamber at the top. At the back of the torpedo tube is one of the boats ammo lockers. Notice this boat has been set up with eight MK-6 depth charges, four to a side. The boat carries her covered 20mm cannon, and we see just the frame work for the early style MK-II smoke generator. (Charles B. Jones)

23b. Lt. Frank W. Rowe (second from right) was the Assistant Supervisor of Shipbuilding and it was he who would initiated, organized, established, and in October 1940 began operating a school at the Electric Boat Company, in Bayonne. This school was for familiarization and primary operational training of the officers and enlisted men, for the first established PT boat squadrons. More than 2500 officers and enlisted men would pass through this school. The school was located on 11 Schuyler Place in Bayonne. They are on the bow of one of the seventy-seven footers which has been moved to the outdoor boat shed. (Heather Rowe)

24. A rare look at the instant the MK-18 tube has fired it’s MK-VIII torpedo. You can see the amount of power that has launched the torpedo, which can be seen just forward in all of the smoke. Gyro angles were usually set on the torpedoes before they were put into the tubes. These were closely checked to be sure that the settings were in the right direction to the standard setting for each particular tube. The tubes sat on training gears which would be cranked out so the torpedo when fired would clear the deck. (Charles B. Jones)

24b. Wonderful stern shot of this 77 footer showing the powerful wake that was created by the design of the hull and the three powerful 4M-2500 Packard Marine engines. Engineers throughout the war tried to eliminate this wake, which was highly visible from the air, but had limited success. (Irwin Chase)

25. This second series boat PT-67, is slowly heading in to the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center, in Rhode Island. Notice she still carries her radio direction finder loop antenna on her forward cabin. The boat has two forward MK-18 torpedo tubes, and aft depth charges. The crew is dressed in underway weather protection gear as this photo was most likely taken in January 1942. (Bruce Marshall)

26. One of the most famous Elco 77 foot boats to come out of the war was PT-41. It would be commanded by Lt. John D. Bulkeley in the Philippines, with Squadron three. This is the boat that in March 1942, would take General MacArthur, his family and staff off the island of Corregidor, with Japanese forces beginning to surround the area. They traveled through stormy seas patrolled by Japanese warships and reached Mindanao two days later. From here MacArthur would take a plane to Australia. This wonderful model was constructed by Elco employee Donald Rosencrantz, who worked in the hull department. Don would build several models for the company and other dignitaries. Elco employees were thrilled when they learned that one of the boats they built, played such an important part in the war to date. (Donald Rosencrantz)

26b. A beautiful starboard side look at the PT-41 model. You can clearly see the amount of skill and craftsmanship that went into the building of a Rosencrantz built model. It should be noted that many of the parts on this boat were constructed of white metal, making his skill in building second to none. One of these boats was presented to Lt. John D. Bulkeley when he made a visit to the plant, after coming home from the Philippines. (Donald Rosencrantz)

27. Wonderful look at these boats as they skim past the New York Skyline. These first series boats are coming from the Kill Van Kull, likely from Elco. To the left out of the frame would be Bayonne, and in the background you can see the Brooklyn Bridge. The Brooklyn Navy Yard would be on the other side of the bridge. The boats would be making their way to be loaded sometime around December 12, 1941. The numbers on their cabins do not reflect the correct boat’s that they are, and were set up this way because of spies. For instance PT-8 was actually PT-39, and PT-2 was PT-45. (Frank J. Andruss Sr)

28. Nice photo of PT-28 from Squadron 1, which is taking on gasoline. She is at the fueling dock at Pearl Harbor just prior to the Japanese attack. After the attack PT-28. along with two other boats returned to the Sand Island dock and sent rescue parties ashore. She would also participate in the Battle of Midway, and saw service in the Aleutian campaign. Later she was wrecked in a storm on January 12, 1943.(Frank J. Andruss Sr)

29. The cold months at the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center could be pretty brutal. The cold weather canceled many underway training classes, and became tough on the men. Here we see two of the second series 77 footers tied at the finger piers at the base. Both are set up in the same manner with two forward MK-18 torpedo tubes and eight aft depth charges. They both carry the 20mm cannon on the stern. The boat to the right is PT-65. Snow has covered the other boats numbers. (Charles B. Jones)

30. A nice look at several of the second series boats as they go through maneuvers in Long Island Sound, sometime in 1942. These boats would be stationed at the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center. They would also become famous as PT-62-68 were used in the film “Crash Dive” released in 1943. It stared Tyrone Power, Dana Andrews, and Anne Baxter. Elco employees were thrilled when they got to watch the movie in early 1944, when it played at the Dewitt Theater in Bayonne. (Ted Walther)

31. PT-64 is at the dock at the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center, while waiting for one of her MK-VIII torpedoes. The Hanson Torpedo Truck Crane was built by the Hanson clutch and machinery Company in Tiffin, Ohio. It was used in bringing the torpedo over from the warehouse where it will be eased into the MK-18 torpedo tube. (Charles B. Jones)

31b. PT-39 has been lightered back to Elco from the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center. She sits in the boat basin on a barge and will be trucked to New York. The boat was introduced to the public at a large rally which was staged at noon on November 22, 1944. The boat was placed at the intersection of Wall and Broad Street’s, and was used as part of the opening for the 6th War Loan Drive campaign, to launch the “Wall Street Fleet”. She saw service with Squadron 3 at Guadalcanal before being transferred to the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center where she was used to train repair personnel. (PT Boats Inc.)

32. Beautiful color drawing showing one of the first series boats. This is PT-34 as she looked coming off the assembly line. She carries her gray tones on her hull and deck and the Dewandre power turret, with four MK-18 torpedo tubes and four MK-VIII torpedoes. This boat would later serve with Squadron 3, under command of Lt. John Bulkeley. This was the only PT squadron engaged in the defense of the Philippines. Among its important missions was the evacuation of Gen. Douglas MacArthur from Corregidor in March 1942. (Drawing by Al Ross)

32b. This drawing showing the two different classes of the 77 foot boat. Gray tones were used for both classes coming off the assembly line, but one can see with the second series, that the Dewandre turrets have been removed and an addition of the 20mm cannon has been added to the stern. (Drawing by Al Ross.)

33. Another fine drawing by Al Ross showing one of the second series boats. This one is PT-65, which has removed her aft MK-18 torpedo tubes and replaced them with the Type C Depth charges. One of the changes in the second series boats was the removal of the boot from the front of the pilot house, and a small platform aft of the cockpit, in which a whip antenna was mounted. They also strengthened the frame by adding deck stiffeners, which ran fore and aft on both sides of the boat. This boat would serve with Squadron 4, the PT Boat training school before being transferred to Squadron 5. (Drawing by Al Ross)