Chapter six photo descriptions

1. This worker has just opened the door to the oven, which has been heated to 140 degrees. It was left here for at least ten hours, making the wood soft and easier to form. This technique was the same used in the wood working process of the PT boats. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

2. Workers are building the jig for the frames that will be attached to make up the hull of one of the 30 foot pleasure craft. Looking above we see the mezzanine area on the second floor which was used to build cabin truck structures of the PT boats. (Frank J. Andruss Sr. )

3. Inside the main assembly building we see the center boat has been planked. It will soon will be hooked to the hoist to be turned right side up, an invention that was used during war time. To the lower left of the photo is a jig that will receive the frames that will make up the hull. Farthest forward to the right, we see an uncompleted PT boat. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

4. With the hull completed and hooked into over-head winches, it begins the turning process, so that workers can begin to work on the decking. Certainly not as large as the PT boats that once occupied this area, the assembly process to completion is much faster. (Andrew Shanahan)

5. With many of the pleasure craft much smaller in size, they could be towed out of Building 21 using the side garage door. Hooked into the tow motor and on her cradle on wheels the boat will make its way to the dockside crane. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

6. Now that the boat has left the assembly building, it has been hooked into the dockside crane. From here it will be gently lowered into the boat basin, and if other assembly is needed it will be towed to the wet boat basin. The front large sliding doors on rollers are kept closed to keep heat inside the assembly area. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

7. Now in the boat basin and floating on her own, the trial crew will begin to run tests to make sure all systems are running properly. She is one of Eco's 30 foot pleasure craft. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

8. The Eco 35’ Cruiser was efficiently designed for easy riding and claimed that it had a PT proven underbelly that cut hull resistance, that boosted speed per horse power. It had a fully equipped galley, lavatory, full size berths, and plenty of storage space below decks. All copper tanks and plumbing throughout the boat. These were offered in 1947 with five sizes from 27, 35, 40, 47, and 62 feet. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

8b. A look inside the 40’ Cruiser Salon, showing the wonderful craftsmanship that Eco was known for. All trim was made from African Mahogany with a spacious helm made for comfort. The boat could sleep six people and had two lavatories, one with a shower. It had a roomy galley onboard and could hit a top speed of anywhere from 24 to 27 knots. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

8c. Left Admiral Russel S. Berkey, USN Commander of the New York Navy Yard, Mr. George W. Codrington, and Elco’s Executive Vice President, Henry R. Sutpen aboard one of the Post War Elco 40’ Express Cruisers. (PT Boats Inc.)

9. A beautiful port side look at Eco's top of the line 1947 62’ Motor Yacht. A luxurious motor yacht with comfortable accommodations for seven guest’s and two crew. This had a flying bridge, and was offered in both gasoline and diesel engines. The boat was beautifully finished with incredible attention to fittings, upholstery, and furnishings. African Mahogany throughout the boat, Eco spared no expense in making this one of the nicest yachts on the market. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

9b. One can see the incredible workmanship that Eco put into the lounge area of it’s 62’ Motor Yacht. The furnishings are fit for a king and queen. Carpeted flooring with top of the line comfort built in with plenty of lighting and space for guests. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

10. Elco’s 40’ cruiser which offered top of the line furnishings with African Mahogany used throughout. Elco is using some very pretty models in bathing suits which made for a great selling tool. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

10b. Port Elco located in Miami, Florida. This was used to showcase many of the Elco pleasure craft that were on display. Customers would be treated to a personal inspection of the boats both new and used. In 1923 Port Elco in New York was opened, and people could come off the street to inspect the boats. (PT Boats Inc.)

11. The offices of Port Elco in Miami, Florida. A rare look inside showing Elco workers in their every day job. The man on the left seems to be writing up a possible order for a boat, as the women in the chair listens. (PT Boats Inc.)

11b. Port Elco in Miami had a wonderful lounge area for customers, complete with a working stone fire place. On the easel to the right is a poster of Elco’s 1940 57 foot Yacht. (PT Boats Inc.)

12. The beautiful complex of the Electro Dynamic Company with the first floor being occupied by the Elco Works of the Electric Boat Company. The fire in 1963 would destroy these entire buildings. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

13. The massive heat and wind swept fire destroyed almost everything in its path. Twisted steel and burned out buildings were all that was left. All but two of the 19 buildings that made up Elco were lost. Suffering a great deal was the Electro Dynamic Company, that at the time of the fire employed 500 people that manufactured motors for submarines and other navy ships. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

13b. Electro Dynamic workers left: Morris Hagen and Sal Marino sift through the rubble to try and save anything that could be used for future use. They are trying to collect castings. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

14. Fire has destroyed what was once the Elco vault located on the second floor of this building. To the left you can see Building 20, the office area which was not harmed by the fire, nor was the attached Building 21, the main assembly area for the boats. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

14b. A crane with wrecking ball has begun to demolish what was left of the structures for Elco and Electro Dynamics. It would take several months to clear out this area. Fire-Fighters still had to contend with hot spots within the wreckage. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

15. In 1998 Bayonne resident and former Elco worker Frank Karahuta, invited me to visit the site. This was one of the photo’s I took when I first arrived after walking out to the docks. Seeing this building was one of the highlights of my life. It is easy to see the neglect of not only the building, but the concrete roadway in front which has deteriorated and parts of it have fallen into the water. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

16. A nice look at the Twin Boom crane on the concrete roadway. This crane was built at Bergen Point Iron Works in Bayonne, and was a reminder as to the boats that were gently lowered into the boat basin. The crane has a sling set up for lowering boats into the water. To the left of the crane are some storage buildings, on the dock, and to the right the white building was the Elco Club house. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

17. The inside of the main assembly building was shown to me by Elco Marina Manager John Tencza. Although not in terrible shape, the roof had begun to rot and rain and the elements would puddle on the floor. Electric to the building had been shut off. You can see some of the original green funnel lights that were present during the building of the PT boats. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

17b. Another look at the assembly building looking towards the back. You can clearly see the water on the floor, and debris that has fallen on the floor, which has been placed into piles. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

18. The dockside crane would continue to operate while the Marina was on site. The crane control house was original to the crane during the time the PT boats and pleasure craft were being launched. The crane ran by electricity and heavy cables. It should be noted that the crane was never painted yellow during the war years, but was gray as was the control house. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

19. This is the long view from the dock to the exit, which would lead to Newark Bay. These are the original break water pylons that you see just outside of the docks that are in the water. This view is looking out from the main assembly building. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

20. A second spectacular second fire in September 2001, would light up the sky over Bayonne’s Bergen Point section around 8:00pm on a Monday. This fire would seal the fate of the old building that was a prominent figure during the years of making the PT boats. From this inside photo you can see the incredible damage that was done, as one wall has collapsed and the portion of this roof caved in. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

20b. Another look inside the assembly building after the fire. Fire officials would label the blaze suspicious. There were no utilities in the building, nothing that could be determined as a source of ignition. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

21. Ladder truck (2) from Bayonne, fights the spectacular blaze that could be seen for many miles. Ultimately some 50 fire-fighters and almost every fire company in the city helped pour water into the burning structure. No fire-fighters would enter the building, as it was deemed too unsafe. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

21b. Fire-fighters on an extension ladder pour water on many of the hot spots the day after the fire. When they arrived on the scene the night before, they would find heavy flame and smoke coming through the building. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

22. Demolition of the site is in full swing, and the only structure’s left standing are the Elco crane, and the Elco club house. In 2003, under the recommendation of the Historical Society of Bayonne, the crane would be dismantled and stored for future use. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

22b. A brick from Building 21 was sent to the author by Bayonne resident Andy Shanahan, as a reminder of a once proud company. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

23. After the success of removing debris from the fire, the land was purchased and surveyed. On the old Elco site and beyond, some 32 acres of land would be used to create many waterfront town houses in a gated community, called Boatworks. These wonderful homes would offer spectacular views and give people a chance to live close to New York. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

24. This photo shows the Townhouses, which sit very close to the main entrance of Building 21, the main assembly plant for PT boats and later pleasure craft. To the right is the Elco Marina. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

25. A beautiful memorial that was erected in 2005, sits inside the boatworks community. It pay’s tribute to those men and women that worked at the Elco site. It also pays tribute to the officers and enlisted men that served aboard the PT boats during WWII. This area is also lit at night and has park benches for those wishing to sit and reflect in this honored area. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

26. Just outside of the boatworks complex sits the Elco Marina. It is set up just about opposite where the main assembly building would have been during the war. It offers easy access to the Kill Van Kull River inlet, and is minutes away from the Bayonne Bridge. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

27. The white topped retaining wall around the Boatworks Town Houses pretty much shows what was once the Elco Naval Division and Elco Yacht Works facilities. You can clearly see the original break water pylons to the right of the Elco Marina Docks. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

28. On October 4, 2006 a dedication for the restored Elco Crane took place. Guests invited by Mayor Joseph V. Doria Jr., the City Council of Bayonne, and Baker Residential would met at the site, which was chosen for the this historical crane, and her final resting place. The site chosen was inside the Mayor Richard A. Rutkowski Park, in Bayonne, New Jersey. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

28b. Guests at the Crane Dedication Ceremony are Korean War Veterans Left: Andrew J. Shanahan, Larry Berulli, and Barry Dugan. The fourth man is WWII Disabled American Veteran, Henry Sanchez. (Andrew J. Shanahan)

29. A wonderful look at the crane which looks out over the water, not far from where she began her career with Elco. Today she proudly stands waiting for another PT boat to gently drop into the water, only this time on a peaceful mission from God. She is here to remind visitors of her past and the work she did rushing the little wooden boats to the war zone. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

30. From the Elco crane dedication ceremony, this paper weight was given to the Author by Bayonne, New Jersey resident Andrew J. Shanahan. It is a wonderful reminder of the dedication by so many that helped not only save the crane but restore it for future generations to enjoy. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)