Elco the Lighter side of War

Chapter five photo description

1. Elco receives it’s first Army Navy E Award for product excellence. Officers and other dignitaries attend this special event. Holding the flag to the left is Elco’s Executive Vice President Henry R. Sutphen, to his left is Assistant Supervisor of Ship Building Lt. Frank W. Rowe, to his left is Elco employee, Milton W Hoyt, an employee of 38 years, and behind him is Preston L. Sutphen, General Manager of Elco. This award would be presented to Elco six times during the companies assembly of PT boats during World War II. (Lt. Cmdr. F.W. Rowe)

1b. Hundreds of workers, office staff and guest’s have crowded Building 21, the main assembly building at Elco. They are here to attend the ceremonies for the first presentation of the Army Navy E Award for excellence. (Lt. Cmdr. F.W. Rowe)

2. An original Army Navy E Awarded indoor flag, presented to the Elco Naval Division for it’s 5th award. This one belonged to Managing Constructor Irwin Chase and hung in his offices at the plant. It belongs to the author and was donated by the Tremaine family. (Frank J Andruss Sr.)

3. This Elco Award booklet was handed out to those attending the companies award of yet another Army Navy E Award. It is dated August 26, 1942. Some of the dignitaries and speakers that day were Lt. J. D. Gessford, Master of ceremonies, Lt. Comdr. John D. Bulkeley, of Squadron 3 PT boats in the Philippines, Lawrence Y. Spear, President of the Electric Boat Company, Milton W. Hoyt, Elco employee of 38 years building boats, and Miss Marion Sutphen, Sponsor. (Frank J Andruss Sr.)

4. Elco workers from the Production Department are enjoying a night out, as part of the ceremonies for the Army Navy E Award. They are at the Tise Tavern in Jersey City, a popular spot and frequented by Elco for dances and dinner parties. (PT Boats Inc.)

5. A look at the 1941 Industrial Softball Champions. This would be Elco’s first championship for the mens softball team. They were led by their ace Vince Delikat that pitched them to victory in the playoffs. Members that are known include Mike Banasiak last row extreme right, Joe Pruskiewicz in the middle row, second from left, and Walter Campbell holding the sign. Elco would win the championship again in 1942 and 1944. (Charles Waller)

5b. Beautiful trophy for the 1941 Industrial Softball Champions. Presented to the team by the Elco Works Employees Association, the trophy would be placed inside the lobby area of Building 20, which was the main offices of Elco. (Irwin Chase)

6. The 1942 Industrial Softball Champions now lined up and looking sharp in their Elco presented Championship sweaters. Third from the right is Charles Waller, executive assistant to the Works Manager. The women in the center is Miss Mary Patterson who worked in the offices in the Works Department. (Charles Waller)

6b. Championship Sweater presented to team player Charles Waller, as the 1944 Industrial Softball Champions. Waller lead the team that year in hits and runs batted in. This sweater was donated to the Author by his son James Waller, and is a wonderful example from many years ago. (Charles Waller)

7. A nice photo of the Inter Departmental League Bowling Champions for the 1942-1943 season, showing the men’s team from the Electrical Department. A large trophy was presented to the captain of the team, from Mechanical engineer George A. Fulton, 3rd from left. (PT Boats Inc.)

7b. Winners for Bowling team from the Electrical Department line up behind the transom of this boat, just before the boat is turned over. With trophy in hand, the sign reads “Lets Bowl Em Over, whether in the workshop or on the ally’s, Elco men strive for Victory, if we keep the ball of endeavor rolling straight, we are bound to scatter the pins of indifference, Men and Women of Elco, let’s Bowl Um Over”. Shaking hands on the left is George A. Fulton, one of Elco’s mechanical Superintendents. (PT Boats Inc.)

8. Members of the 1941-42 Elco Championship Basketball Team. They played in the Hudson County Amateur Athletic League, and gathered the top spot in the payoffs by beating General Cable Company in the finals. Early basketball courts were rarely perfectly smooth. Knee pads were standard equipment to prevent severe injuries from protruding nails, splinters, uneven planking, and other potentially dangerous defects in court flooring, which were even played outdoors. (PT Boats Inc.)

8b. Members of the Bayonne Industrial League Elco Basketball Champions for the 1943-1944 season, take time to pose next to Building 21. Front row: Nazurak, LeFurge, Gendzwill, and McCarthy. Back row: Goodhart, Orlowski, Britt, Delikat, Grimm and Eggers. (Frank Karaut)

9. Great look at the Elco Band. Made up from workers in different departments, these nine players certainly would provide wonderful performances, during the noon time Labor Management functions. Leading the band on the accordion is J. Ckstowicz. Notice all the players still wearing their company provided work uniforms. (PT Boats Inc.)

10. Ladies from the inner offices at Elco, surprise Secretary Mary Morgan (4th from left) who was recently engaged to be married. They have given her a cake and for a wedding present a wonderful set of silverware. Workers took the time, usually at lunch break to have these small gatherings for one another. (PT Boats Inc.)

10b. This beautiful cake was presented during another noon time ceremony in the offices of Building 20. The cake says “Good luck to our Ensign from all of us”. The boat pictured on the cake is PT-4, which is a bit odd as the boat was built by the Fisher Boat Works, Detroit, MI. To the far left is Charles Waller, executive assistant to the Works Manager, who at that time was Glenville Tremaine. (Charles Waller)

11. A noon time War Bond rally being held at the outdoor stage. Addressing the workers is Lt. Cmdr. F. W. Rowe, the Assistant Supervisor of shipbuilding at the Elco Naval Division. The band has also taken the stage, as always providing good music for those in attendance. The outdoor stage was generally set up behind Building 16, the wet boat basin. (Lt. Cmdr. F. W. Rowe)

11b. Special office inside Elco for Labor Management. As one can see it has many war time posters and War Bond posters. To ensure uninterrupted production, Elco workers generally agreed to a "no-strike" pledge for the duration of the war, in exchange for government intervention to resolve labor disputes fairly. Labor Management worked hand and hand with workers to ensure happy workers, and help with any disputes. (Navy War College Archives)

12. Elco workers attend a barn dance at Mackenzie Post on Avenue E Bayonne, New Jersey. Guests would listen to country music and even square dance to live music of the day. Barn dances and social events like this, helped boost the morale of workers. These dances weren't just for fun—they helped workers cope with the emotional toll of war and reminded them of the strength of community. (PT Boats Inc.)

12b. Elco’s Labor Management Team set up suggestion boxes throughout the plant for production ideas. Prizes were awarded to those with the best ideas. First place received a twenty-five-dollar war bond. Elco over the years would receive some very good suggestions for operating the plant, and improving Departments. (Irwin Chase)

13. An engagement party being held at Mackenzie Post on Avenue E, Bayonne, New Jersey. Helen Michael’s second from left is, all smiles at the party thrown for her, from the workers of the Production Department. The women 4th from the left second row is Alice Messeder, also from the Production Department. (PT Boats Inc.)

13b. Eleanor Behney (ready to turn the hull) took a job in the design business office of Elco. While there Eleanor was first honored by Electric Boat, selected to be the ship's sponsor of PT-138 and preside over the "turning of the hull" ceremony, a major milestone in construction of PT boats. After the war, she was sought after by the company as a model and featured in several advertising photos and brochures promoting Elco's famous luxury yachts. (Irwin Chase)

14. Wooden sign made by the carpenter shop for Elco employees in their attempt to purchase two PT boats. Sponsored by the Labor Management War Bond

Committee. Elco workers did buy enough war bonds to make the purchase of the boats, showing their patriotism and determination. (PT Boats Inc.)

14b. Boy Scout Troop 25, takes the time to visit the Elco Naval Division, where they were given a tour of the assembly areas. On July 15, 1941, the scout troops of Bayonne organized an emergency corp of 800 scouts to aid in the civilian defense of the city. Troop 25 was sponsored by St. Vincents Catholic Church located at 979 Avenue C, Bayonne, New Jersey. (PT Boats Inc.)

15. Labor Management noon time entertainment on the outdoor band stand. From left: Works Manager Glenville Tremaine, Comdr. John D. Bulkeley of squadron 3 fame in the Philippines, and Managing Constructor Irwin Chase. They have presented a model of Bulkeley’s PT-41 as part of the entertainment program. This beautiful model was built by Elco Hull Department employee, Don Rosencrantz. (Irwin Chase)

16. Executive Vice President of Elco, Henry R. Sutphen has taken to the stage, which was set up inside Building 21. He is addressing workers as to the fine job that they are doing in producing our PT boats for the US Navy. Also, he is addressing them as to the War Bond Drives that were producing great results. Behind him in the first row (second from left) is Elco’s Managing Constructor, Irwin Chase. To Chase’s left is Lt. Cmdr. John D. Bulkeley, from PT boat Squadron 3 fame, and to Bulkeley’s left is Elco’s General Manager, Preston Sutphen. (PT Boats Inc.)

16b. Elco devised an ingenious way to honor each state of the union, by naming a boat after that state. Here men and women workers pose behind the Massachusetts sponsored boat, PT-358. In a letter dated May 13, 1943 the Governor of Massachusetts, Leverett Saltonstall thanked Elco, and was proud that this fighting boat would represent his State. (PT Boats Inc.)

17. The Army Navy E Flag proudly flies over the Elco Naval Division of the Electric Boat Company each and every day. Here Police attach the flag ready to hoist it up. You can see the five stars for excellence in productivity that the company was awarded during the war years. (Frank J Andruss Sr.)

18. Elco workers enjoy their 3rd annual outing from 1943. From the look of things they are having a great time. Later they would head to the Pavonia Yacht Club in Bayonne, New Jersey. Committee chairman, Edward McCaffrey, Vice President of the association reported a stellar turnout. (PT Boats Inc.)

19. Another game of softball during the noon time break at the plant. From the looks of this photo the man at the plate is swinging for a home run, while others watch. (PT Boats Inc.)

19b. Noontime baseball games on the Elco field became very popular. After hours games sometimes lasted into the night. These games managed to draw pretty good crowds as well. Here it looks like this runner is going to be called out at the plate. (PT Boats Inc.)

20. These beautiful singers called the Elcoettes, take to the stage for the ever popular noon time entertainment, this time featuring popular songs of the day. These three ladies were also employees of the plant, worked in the inner offices. Elco workers dressed in their white company supplied coveralls sit up on the outdoor stage, as company officials will address the workers, about war bonds and their commitment in producing the best boats for the Navy. (PT Boats Inc.)

20b. Halloween time in 1943 has these male workers dressed as ladies. Even more amazing is that they are showing their legs on the outdoor stage, during a noontime break for workers. All in fun, it helped break the tensions and rigors of assembly work, and gave the workers time to relax and clear their head. (PT Boats Inc.)

21. War Bond rallies were an important part of the makeup of the Elco Naval Division. Bond drives in many states to help raise money to build PT boats was a common practice. When they did raise enough funds, a ceremony at the plant took place and that boat was put on display. Here representatives proudly display this boat which was sponsored and purchased with War Bonds by the people of the City of Rochester and Olmsted County of Minnesota. To the left is Lt. Cmdr. Frank W. Rowe, the Assistant Supervisor of Ship Building at Elco. (PT Boats Inc.)

22. More representatives and sponsor officials crowd the hull of this boat, during the War Bond Ceremonies from the City of Rochester. In the front row far right is Elco’s Managing Constructor Irwin Chase. Behind Chase is General Manager of Elco Preston L. Sutphen, to his right is Executive Vice President of Elco, Henry R. Sutphen, and to his right is Elco’s Assistant Supervisor of Elco, Frank W. Rowe. (PT Boats Inc.)

23. War Bond representatives during ceremonies, were allowed to tour the boats so they could see what their purchase has built. Here one of the representatives checks out the helm area of this boat while it is docked. (PT Boats Inc.)

24. These lovely ladies are representatives from the War Bond and Stamp Committee, representing the City of Grand Haven, Michigan. Their city has raised enough War Bond funds to build one Elco PT boat. They are on the hull of PT-375, the boat that was built with these funds. The boat is docked at the outdoor boat shed in front of Building 21. (PT Boats Inc.)

25. A wonderful look at PT-375 loaded with sponsor’s and representatives from Grand Haven, Michigan. As part of the ceremonies the boat will be taken out for a run just outside of the plant, by the Elco trial crew. Here they will get to see first hand what the boat they raised funds for can do. The boat is leaving the dock from Building 21, the main assembly building. Notice the large twin boom crane over looking the boat basin. (PT Boats Inc.)

25b. Standing on the bow of the newly built PT-129. Left is Executive Vice President Henry R. Sutphen, Admiral Royal Eason Ingersoll, Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic Fleet, and F.W. Rowe Assistant Supervisor of Ship Building for Elco. (Irwin Chase)

26. This officer is attaching a plaque inside the boat which reads, This Fighting Ship sponsored and made possible by War Bond Purchases of the people of Rochester, Minnesota. Each boat would have one of these type plaques attached to her, if purchased by a City, whose people raised enough funds to do so. (PT Boats Inc.)

27. A huge turnout along the concrete roadway, as Elco celebrates the launching of PT-379, as she is draped with flags from bow to stern. Other boats in the basin include PT-383 in the center and PT-378 closest to the gasoline barge. The photo was taken on August 3, 1943. These boats in the basin would make up part of Squadron 28, going on to serve in the South Pacific and Southwest Pacific areas. (PT Boats Inc.)

28. General Manager of Elco, Preston L. Sutphen, presents a War Bond Trophy to Edward Shibley. Contests were held, and prizes were awarded to individuals with the highest sales. Also on the outdoor stage we see a man and women wearing crowns that say Elco across the front. These were awarded for the second most War Bond sales, along with a certificate of appreciation. By 1945, employees would purchase some $1,500,000 worth of War Bonds. (PT Boats Inc.)

29. The Elco Memorial was set up between the main offices. It was in honor of those that worked for the company, but left to join the military branches of the service. Several during the war lost their life, and Elco produced a Magazine called “Those Who Serve”. Inside were the photo’s of past Elco employees that gave their life for freedom. (PT Boats Inc.)

30. Lt.(jg) Joseph Atkinson, boat captain of PT-586, attaches a bronze plaque on the inside of the boats day room cabin. This boat was made possible by Carter County Tennessee War Bond purchases. Helping him with this task is Mrs. Alex Shell of the women’s division of the finance committee. Ceremonies followed and the party was entertained at dinner by officials of the company and officers of the Navy. Representing the Elco company was Henry R. Sutphen, Executive Vice President; Preston L. Sutphen and S.C. Kelly, Vice Presidents and Irwin Chase, Managing Constructor. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

30b. This is the original plaque that was mounted on PT-586 by boat captain Lt.(jg) Joseph Atkinson and Mrs. Alex Shell from War Bond Purchases made by Carter County Tennessee. It is from the personal collection of the author and remains a wonderful piece of Elco history. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

31. One of the highlights for the company was the awarding of the 4th Army Navy award for excellence and the World premiere of the short film “Devil Boats”. This ceremony and showing was held on August 22, 1944, at the Dewitt Theater, Bayonne, New Jersey. Over 2,800 Elco employees and invited guests attended this special night. To the left of the photo is the American Legion Band of Richmond County, which provided a concert as guest’s were arriving. This short film was created by Warner Brothers with Elco’s express permission. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

32. Dignitaries and Navy brass begin to arrive to the Dewitt Theater. Getting out of the Elco car (adjusting his jacket) is Elco’s Executive Vice President Henry R. Sutphen and to his left in the hat is his wife, Susanna Preston Lees. (PT Boats Inc.)

33. Taking time for the camera while inside the Theater is Left: General Manager of Elco, Preston L. Sutphen, United States Secretary of the Navy, Charles Edison, Rear Admiral Dunn, and Executive Vice President of Elco, Henry R. Sutphen. In Sutphen’s hand is one of the programs handed out that night. (PT Boats Inc.)

33b. Original Press book and entrance ticket. This is a five page press book with color photos, and inserts about the Elco Naval Division and their work in the building of the PT boats. Certainly one of the high points for not only the company, but the workers that made it all possible. These fine examples are from the authors personal collection. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

34. US Navy Officers and sponsors gather on the deck of this PT boat. The good people of Grand Haven, Michigan has purchased enough War Bonds and Stamps for one Elco boat. The plaque was presented to them and will be secured to the boats bulkhead. 4th from the right in the first row is Lt. Cmdr. Frank W. Rowe, Elco’s Assistant Supervisor of Shipbuilding. (PT Boats Inc.)

34b. The two officers representing the Navy, secure the plaque from Grand Haven, Michigan inside the boats day room cabin. It will remain with the boat for as long as she is in the war zone. (PT Boats Inc.)

35. A ten cent dance is held at the American Legion in Bayonne. For ten cents you could get a dance with a pretty lady, and in this case the girls were workers at the plant. The money raised for this type of dance were placed into the war relief fund or to raise money for war bonds. Also a mock jail was set up and you had to get raised funds to get out of Jail. (PT Boats Inc.)

35b. Some of the workers in the Machine Shop Assembly Department area, gather to show the Christmas tree they set up to celebrate the Holidays. There would be no work stoppage as production of the boats was paramount. Parties would be held in outside venues after work and workers would have a great time. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

36. These Bar tenders were on the committee called “Salvage For Victory” campaign. The campaign asked that all Americans do their part in supporting the new war effort by collecting, saving, conserving, and recycling materials that could be repurposed for military uses. In Bayonne and New York, mayors were asked to save the same kinds of materials from municipal dumps and incinerators. In Bayonne, the Department of Sanitation began picking up materials on an alternating schedule with regular garbage collection. In this photo they are being the nights special Bar Tenders to help raise money and awareness of the program. (PT Boats Inc.)

36b. War bond dinner was held for Elco’s Army/Navy E award presentation for excellence in productivity. It is not known who these gentlemen are but at least one of them, 3rd from the left is wearing his Elco ID Badge. Notice the unopened bottle of wine on the table which has a label on it, showing one of the 80 foot Elco PT boats. This was also the night of the showing of the World Premier Featurette “Devil Boats” at the Dewitt Theater in Bayonne, New Jersey. (PT Boats Inc.)

37. As more men were leaving Elco for the service, women workers were being hired to replace the men. It was noted by management that outside activities for them were needed. Here women workers have formed bowling teams and competed the same as the men bowlers. (PT Boats Inc.)

37b. One of the Women bowling teams was none other then the Mosquitoes. Other fun names for the ladies were the Sea Horses, the Eagles, and the Ravens. They held their games at local bowling allies, including the Dewitt Theater, which had a bowling ally in the basement. (PT Boats Inc.)

37c. Great look at some of the skaters at the Boulevard Roller Rink. This was at the time located on the Boulevard at 62nd Street in Bayonne. Many Elco workers took the time to skate and have fun, but could also head here for Ball Room Dancing. During the war they actually had a campaign that you should skate to work to save gasoline for the war effort. (PT Boats Inc.)

38. Elco’s Labor Management Team came up with what was called the Mop-Spruce-Cleanup contest. This was held plant wide, giving employees the chance to win prizes of War Bond Money and Certificates. These unknown Elco workers have been handed winning certificates from their respective department’s for keeping their areas in tip top shape. Handing out the certificates is Mechanical Superintendent George Fulton. (Naval War College Archives)

38b. PT-39 is shown her being pulled by a trailer at Morgan’s Corner in New York. The boat was brought here for a large rally on November 22, 1944, and was displayed at the intersection of Wall and Broad Streets in New York. The boat was a part of the 6th War Loan Campaign titled launch the “Wall Street Fleet”. The boat had a long history in the Solomon Islands before being a training boat at the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center. (PT Boats Inc.)

39. On the lighter side of the war, Frederick Bulkeley (left) takes time out from his busy schedule to chat with his famous son, Lt. Cmdr. John D. Bulkeley. Frederick was the oldest employee at Elco as an inspector, and his son was famous for his exploits with a PT Squadron in the Philippines, that took General Douglas MacArthur from Corregidor and the escaping Japanese forces. Bulkely would be awarded the Medal of Honor. (Naval War College Archives)

40. Helen Jepson signs in at Elco at the Guard Station. Helen sang leading soprano roles with at Metropolitan Opera from 1935 to 1941. Some of her best known roles while at the Met include Desdemona (Otello) and Marguerite (Faust). The Faust recording is still in print, as is her recording of Porgy and Bess. She was the first soprano to record in that role, and the extant recording of her was supervised by Gerswin himself. She captured the hearts of opera lovers with her lyric soprano voice and radiant good looks. Helen was invited to sing for the workers as part of Labor Management’s 4th of July entertainment. (Irwin Chase)

40b. Managing Constructor Irwin Chase helps well known singer, Helen Jepson down the ramp, as her party gets set to board PT-544. Helen was treated to learn first hand how the boats operated. Later she would sing at the outdoor stage area. The boat would go on to serve with Squadron 37 in the Pacific. (Irwin Chase)

40c. Helen Jepson takes to the outdoor stage area to address the workers and other guests. She will entertain them with her beautiful voice, singing some of her well known songs of the past. On the piano is Elco employee Earl McCurdy. Later Helen would work for the school district in Monmouth County, New Jersey as a speech therapist for children. When she retired she and Walter Dellera moved to Bradenton, Florida. She died at the age of 92 on September 16, 1997. (PT Boats Inc.)

41. Women from the Electrical Assembly Department take to the outdoor stage for some afternoon songs. On the piano was Earl McCurdy. This was another build up for purchasing War Bonds. Elco’s motto was “A stamp is a bullet,” a “Bond is a gun, Buy them both till the war is done”. (Irwin Chase)

41b. On August 10, 1942, Elco workers are all smiles after they took the company offer of War Bonds instead of vacations. In a company wide vote the majority of 2400 workers voted to giving up their vacation period to stay on the job and keep the production of PT boats at peak capacity. Soon after the vote, members of the Elco Employees Association held their 3rd annual outing at the Pavonia Yacht Club. Proceeds of the affair were used for the War Service Fund with all proceeds used to stock each PT boat leaving the plant, with cigarettes, razor blades, and chocolate. Mechanical Engineer George A. Fulton is on the far left smiling, while Elco employee 5th from the left is Mike Banasiak. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

42. Managing Constructor Irwin Chase (left) shows off one of the creations made by Elco. This was a highly polished and detailed PT Boat hood ornament. It is not known exactly how many of these were produced, although one was used on the Elco company car, and one presented to Lt. Cmdr. John D. Bulkeley from Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron 3 fame, and recipient of the Medal of Honor. (PT Boats Inc.)

42b. Beautifully detailed hood ornament has been attached to this 1941 Chrysler Crown Imperial vehicle. This was one of Elco’s company car’s and mostly used by Executive Vice President Henry R. Sutphen. (PT Boats Inc.)