+ Chapter One photo descriptions

Scott-Paine Design and the Elco 70 footers

1. Henry R. Sutphen was born in Morristown New Jersey, a son of a Presbyterian minister. He would attend school at Morris University and New York University. He did pioneer work in the development of the electric launch and in the application of gasoline engines in marine craft. Sutphen joined Elco in 1892,where he initiated the design of the submarine chasers and in April 1915 signed a contract with the British for fifty 80 foot Motor Launches. Before the outbreak of World War Two, he brought interest of the Patrol Torpedo Boat to the United States Navy. It would be under his supervision that the PT boats were built for the Navy. Long prominent in the ship building industry, Sutphen was the Executive Vice President of the Elco Naval Division of the Electric Boat Company in Bayonne, New Jersey. He was also the director of the Sutphen Product Corporation and of Canadair LTD, of Canada. Sutphen was 75 years old when he died of a stroke in his home at 876 Park Avenue in New York. (Bert Morgan)

2. Irwin Chase was considered to be one of the “founding fathers” of the extremely successful American PT boat program. Chase, a University of Michigan Naval architecture graduate of 1905, became fascinated early in his career with small, fast power boats and according to Elco, created the first “planing” hulled power boat. In 1915, Chase is also credited for designing the Elco Cruisette, then considered to be the world’s most popular cruising power boat during the years between the two world wars. In February of 1939, Elco’s Henry R Sutphen asked Mr. Chase to accompany him on the Queen Mary at the request of President Roosevelt (FDR) to evaluate and purchase at their discretion one of England’s motor torpedo boats. Irwin Chase was a critical part of the design team that allowed Elco to become the largest manufacturer of American PT boats at its newly built extensive facility at Bayonne, New Jersey. Eventually he transferred from Bayonne, to the Electric Boat facility in Connecticut in 1949. He created his home in Deep River, CT. Chase died on May 9,1974 at the age of 90. (Irwin Chase)

3. Glenville S. Tremaine had been a ship fitter's apprentice at the Bath Iron Works in his native Maine, and he took correspondence courses in draftsmanship at the same time. He studied yacht design under Henry Douglas Bacon and was "loaned" to naval architect Morris Whitaker for a brief assignment to New York in 1912. When work at Bath slowed down, Tremaine answered a newspaper ad for a draftsman and was hired by Elco in March, 1913. Tremaine became Irwin Chase's apprentice and assistant draftsman until the 1923. Tremaine carried on the Elco design traditions that Chase began in 1906, and he drew wonderful cruisers and motor yachts through the Roaring Twenties, aided by his new assistant, Alfred "Bill" Fleming. It was Tremaine that padlocked the doors, to end Elco's long history of wooden boat building in 1949. He would go on to open his own company building boats called Tremaine Yacht Works in Ship Bottom New Jersey. (Glenville Tremaine).

4. Preston L. Sutphen was the son of Elco’s Executive Vice President, Henry R. Sutphen. He was an Army pilot in World War I and would attended Princeton University, graduate of the class of 1921. He would begin his employment with Electric Boat Company in 1922, at it’s Groton plant, before transferring to Bayonne in 1929. He worked in the Sales Department before becoming General Manager of both the Yacht Division and Elco Naval Division. During the war Sutphen visited forward bases to see how the PT boats were holding up in the Pacific and recorded ways to make things better. His son Preston Sutphen II would serve as an officer on PT-563 with Squadron 29 during the war. Later after the war it was Sutphen who competed with other boat builders in the pleasure boating field. After his retirement he served from 1952 to 1962 as a consultant on small boats for the Government. (Preston Sutphen)

5. Lt. Cmdr. Frank W. Rowe was the Assistant Supervisor of Ship Building for the Elco Naval Division. In addition to his regular duties Rowe initiated, organized, established, and in 1940 began operating a school behind the plant for familiarization and primary operational training of the officers crews for the first PT boat squadrons. When the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center was authorized in March 1942, the Elco Naval Academy was then transformed into a school of specialized instruction in the construction, maintenance, and repair of the PT boats, and would continue until the establishment of the MTB repair and training unit at Melville, Rhode Island. By December of 1944, in excess of 2500 officers and enlisted men were given instruction during the four years the Elco Naval Academy operated. (Heather Rowe)

5b. Alfred “Bill” Fleming came onboard Elco around 1923. He would become Glenville Tremaine’s assistant, and shortly would become Elco’s premiere Stylist. Fleming was a pure behind the scenes genius and a real stickler for details when it came to the design of pleasure craft in the roaring twenties. His work ethic and attention to the most smallest details served him well when the PT boats were being constructed. (Bert Morgan)

6. Building 21, the main assembly building for the PT boats. Still under construction, she was designed and built by the Austin Company of New York. At the time she was a state of the art wooden boat building facility. Forms for the concrete roadway will be the next phase of the project. The two large doors were designed to slide open, so boats could be towed onto the concrete roadway. (Irwin Chase)

6b. The backside of the building was designated as Building 20, where the main offices would be located. An area was set aside for the US Navy and Supervisor of Shipbuilding. Tons of concrete will be mixed and poured before the walkways and roadways would be completed. To the left of this photo we see the two massive outdoor lumber sheds. (Irwin Chase)

6c. Construction has begun on what would become the large outdoor boat shed. A barge crane will lift the heavy steel girders into place for assembly. When completed this area will hold several boats in dock spaces where other areas of assembly can take place. This shed will alleviate space problems in the main plant area, and give the boats time to soak. Boats running time trials or being used for other testing will operate from this shed area. (Irwin Chase)

7. Building 21 construction continues to move forward, and was completed in an amazing time of 100 days. The concrete roadway is completed and work continues on the massive twin boom crane. This crane was built and assembled by Bergen Point Iron Works in New Jersey. The Bergen Point Iron Works manufactured steel structures and highway safety devices. The company began business in February 1907; its first job was a small extension to the Narragansett Bay Coal Depot. The firm went on to construct naval coaling stations at Cristobal and Balboa on the Panama Canal. To the left we see the completed outdoor boat shed, and docking facilities. (Irwin Chase)

7b. Taken on March 16, 1940, we see an inside look at Building 21, the main assembly building before she would become crowded with boats. Equipped with two main assembly aisles and companion aisles for sub assembly work, this plant provided for several production lines, in which each boat moved forward on its own individul cradle. This area was a massive 240×420 and also included an upper mezzanine level, outdoor boat shed and attached Elco offices. (Irwin Chase)

8. Long view of Building 21, the main assembly area. This looks forward toward the doors which lead out to the concrete roadway and dock area. The boats would make their way to the concrete roadway for launching, for another phase of assembly and soaking. (Irwin Chase)

9. Work continues on what would become Building 16. This area would become the wet boat basin, where boats would be towed to complete and free up space in the main assembly building of Elco. At least 6 boats would fit into this area at one time. This building was not completed in time to be used however on the seventy foot designed boats. (Irwin Chase)

10. Much thought went into the design of how the main assembly area would be set up. Here we see one of the machine shops on the construction floor. It was close to the main area where boats were being assembled, with no steps lost in providing equipment as quickly as needed. (Irwin Chase)

11. On February 10, 1939 Henry R. Sutphen Executive Vice President of Elco, and at the time Chief designer Irwin Chase, embarked for England on the Queen Mary. They would check out the information on the Royal Navy’s progress with MTB designs, by observing the types under construction and see for themselves performance tests. They believed that small, seaworthy motor boats, capable of high speeds would make for a useful fighting craft. Preliminary talks resulted in an understanding that if they succeeded in purchasing one of the 70 foot Scott-Paine designed boats, the Navy would purchase in accordance with the terms of a contract tentatively agreed upon by Elco and the Navy. Negotiations for the Scott-Paine designed craft were successful and on March 17, 1939 Sutphen reported by radio that the boat was purchased under favorable terms with shipment to America in three months. This photo shows Sutphen (4th from the left) with Chase to his left, on the RMS Queen Mary. (Henry R. Sutphen)

12. The Scott-Paine boat PT-9, has made her way from England as deck cargo aboard the SS President Roosevelt, arriving on September 5, 1939. Here she is being off-loaded in New York. From here she was lightered to the Electric Boat Company, in Groton, Connecticut. Elco moved its investment to New London for a series of tests. (Irwin Chase)

12b. A nice starboard side look at PT-9 during testing. Scott-Paine himself came over with the boat, and was in charge of its operation. He, together with the Elco company, solicited the Navy to send its representatives up to New London, to take a spin. The Coast Guard who was also interested sent an observer to these trials, although they did not think this boat had the potentiality for a Coast Guard boat, feeling it was too limited. (Irwin Chase)

13. Port-side look at PT-9 as she continues her testing in New London. One can clearly see her flared bow and streamlined look. You also get a good look at the Dewandre Power gun turrets. At the helm is Elco’s Managing Constructor Irwin Chase. (Irwin Chase)

13b. At the time PT-9 had arrived it was powered by three Rolls Royce Merlin engines. It was felt by Packard chief designer J.G. Vincent, that using an American engine could better the performance of the Rolls Royce product. He convinced Elco and PT-9 would later have Packard Marine Engines installed. Here mock Packard engines are being placed into the engine beds for proper placement. (Irwin Chase)

14. Engineers go through their paces in observing all aspects of the Scott-Paine design PT-9. The Government acquisition of the boat was to take place on November 1, 1939, but the delivery date would be postponed until January 1940. In reality the delay was almost six months but it gave the Elco company time to study the construction of the boat as they were prepared to build their own version of the Scott-Paine design. Elco would base its first series of boats upon this Scott-Paine model, and the delivery delay gave engineers an ample opportunity to examine the boat, look into its construction principles, and adapt or modify the design characteristics of the English boat to best suit the needs of our Navy. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

15. With Elco given the green light by the trial board in successful tests of PT-9, the Navy ultimately approved the purchase of PT-9. The Navy Department made an award to Elco to build 10 motor torpedo boats, PT’s 10-20 and 12 motor boat sub chasers PTC’s 1-12. The first step in the construction of the boat was the assembly of the prefabricated main frames on a building jig which is a double 12- by 12-inch wooden base extending the entire length of the boat. The frames are built of wood braced with plywood. This framework will undergo many assembly stages before completion. (Irwin Chase)

16. The jig with its many frames has been completed and now the keel been added. Workers have started to assemble batten strips on the boats bottom, and sides. The spruce keel, to which is spliced to an oak stem, is put in place and secured with brass bolts. The chine, which is the hull member forming the joint between the bottom of the hull and the sides, is made of spruce and also bolted on. Spruce diagonal frames on the hull sides and longitudinal battens on the bottom are notched into the main frames and fastened with brass screws. Intermediate frames between the main frames are similarly installed in the three forward compartments. The hull is now ready for planking. We can also see here the Elco innovation of building the hull from bottom up, making it easier for workers to work from a less cramped position. (Irwin Chase)

17. A look at the joiner shop located in the upper mezzanine of the main assembly area. It was ideal for making structures and other sub assemblies. Here a rear cabin trunk structure is being framed out for one of the 70 footers. You can clearly see the light weight construction that went into the making of these structures. When completed the cabin was secured to cables and hoisted to the first floor assembly area, then mounted onto the hull. (Irwin Chase)

17b. Another look at the joiner shop, showing progress being made on the cabin trunk structures. Wood working machines and tools were kept here as all assembly of these structures was done in this area for the 70 foot designed boats. (Irwin Chase)

18. When planking is complete, the hull is turned over and the inside work begun. Longitudinal girders made of mahogany covered with plywood run from bulkheads 1, 2, and 3 back to the stern and give the boat a great deal of its stiffness. Cedar clamps or battens are screwed to the inside of the frames on the

sides of the hull and run from bulkhead No.1 to the stern. The main deck frames are notched, spruce deck longitudinal are screwed in place and a 5/8-inch mahogany plywood deck is put on. The deck is secured to the hull with plywood knees between each frame. The knees are bolted to the deck and to the covering board on top, and to the planking, gunwale, and guard clamp on the sides. (Irwin Chase)

18b. A wonderful look at one of the boats looking forward. On the bow her tow rails have been added, as well as the boats forward cabin structure. We see the deck filler on the port side decking which has yet to be sanded. Once sanded a non slip paint will be added to the deck. Workers are below deck doing wiring and piping assembly. On the port side mechanical engineer Clyde Anderson is looking into the cabin structure, keeping a keen eye on all that is being assembled. There is no room for any errors in the construction of the boats. (Irwin Chase)

19. We see the seventy-footer’s in different stages of assembly. Notice the three boats from left to right have had their alunimum alloy boots installed. They were placed on the front of the pilot house just below the three cabin windows. This space was created to stow gear. To the rear of the assemly area we see one of the boats which has been numbered PT-17. She has her torpedo tubes installed as do the other boats to her left. (Irwin Chase)

19b. In the assembly building we see several of the 70 foot boats in different stages of assembly. Most of the boats have had their hulls completed, and at this phase of assembly we see the boats with and without decking, while the boat in the center has it’s planking in place. The forward cabin has been installed, and awaiting workers to continue the process of adding toe rails, hatches, and other equipment. Some of the more obvious changes from PT-9 were in the boats superstructure. The canopy was enlarged and it was constructed so that it could be removable. The pilot house was enlarged and flushed with the truck canopy, which helped with wind and spray deflection on the open bridge. A space was created to stow gear by fitting an alloy boot to the front of the pilot house below the windows. (Irwin Chase)

20. A nice look at the soon to be installed compressor. This large compressor will provide power to the Dewandre machine gun turrets on the boat. This will provide compressed air at relatively low pressure, needing small pipes and fittings. The air transmits pressure using oil as the hydraulic medium. (PT Boats Inc.)

20b. A look at the bubble mount for the Dewandre powered machine gun turrets. These turrets really did not find favor for several reasons, one being they carried a small magazine for rounds, changing the magazine was too slow and cramped, speed of the turret was too slow, and the air compressor was found to be too small causing the turret not to operate smoothly. (Irwin Chase)

21. A small compact engine room showing the three Packard Marine Engines. Notice the levers which the engineer uses to put the engines into gear as needed. From neutral, forward, and reverse he gets those instructions from the Captain at the helm. This is looking aft where you can see the exhaust piping (white) that runs out of the transom. You are seeing the engines from the reverse gear end with the carburetor on the wing engines facing forward, and the center engine facing aft. (Irwin Chase)

22. Two Elco workers are installing the Starboard Propeller Shaft through the propeller strut, through the cut-less bearing, into the shaft log, and finally into the engine room. Once the other end of the shaft is inside the engine room, the keyed coupling flange can be installed onto the end of the shaft. This whole procedure takes about 4 people to man-handle the heavy monel prop shaft into the correct position and involves using a lot of lubrication (grease or tallow) and then twisting, pulling, and pushing! Only then can the shaft and coupling alignment process begin. It takes several hours to complete the process for three shafts. (PT Boats Inc.)

23. PT-10 begins her journey from Building 21, stern first to the concrete roadway. She is being pulled by two small tugs, and sits in her boat cradle on wheels. From here she will make her way to the dockside crane, and gently placed into the boat basin. (Irwin Chase)

23b. Clearing the large sliding doors of Building 21 took skill and patience. At this point she needs to complete other assembly phases, as she carries no machine guns, torpedo tubes, and other important pieces of equipment. Soon the Elco test team will fire up her engines, while she sits at the dock. (Irwin Chase)

24. PT-10 has been brought along the concrete roadway and has been hooked in the dockside crane. She will be gently lowered into the boat basin and then towed to the next phase of assembly. The boat sits in the boat cradle which was fabricated and furnished by Savary & Glaeser in Dunellen, New Jersey. As you can see she has yet to have her machine guns installed, torpedoes, ventilators, and other top side construction. The boat typically needed to "soak" or remain in water for several days to allow the wood to fully absorb moisture and expand, creating a tight seal between the planks and preventing leaks; the exact time depended on the wood type, boat design, and water conditions (Irwin Chase)

25. Dignataries and other Elco staff stand on the deck of PT-10, shortly after being placed into the boat basin. Here she has been towed to the outdoor covered boat shed in front of Building 21. Sub assemblies will take place here, and yet again she will be towed for dock side engine warm up for testing. (Irwin Chase)

26. A look at PT-10 in all her glory, as she is running just outside of the Elco Naval Division. The boat is still in Elco hands and will be put through several tests and trials before being placed with Squadron Two. She would be under the command of Lt. Cmdr. Earl S. Caldwell, USN, where she would accompany her sister boats on a shakedown run in Florida and Caribbean waters. She would not serve with the US Navy but was transferred to the Royal Navy on April 11, 1941. (Irwin Chase)

27. Another beautiful look at PT-10, as she continues her training run. One can clearly see the wake created by the powerful Packard Marine Engines, and the design of her hull. This was something that was a constant problem for the boats and their crews, as these wakes could be seen from the air by enemy planes. (Irwin Chase)

28. Taken at the New York Navy Yard in Brooklyn, these newly built PT’s 9-12 along with PT’s 13 and 14, were delivered here. At the time Elco was rushing to deliver the remaining boats, PT’s 15 through 19. To the left of the photo is PT-3 built by the Fisher Boat Works, Detroit, MI. This photo taken around November 1940, shows the boats shortly before they would be ordered on December 16th, to proceed to Key West, Florida. They would also cruise from Key West to Guantanamo, San Juan, Puerto Rico, and St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands. This would become the boats shakedown cruise, where they would remain in warm waters until during the cold months, were to return on May 13, 1941. (Frank J Andruss Sr.)

29. A look at the Elco 70 foot boats while they were at the Washington Navy Yard in Washington D.C. around December 1940. Ahead of the boats are the USS Potomac (AG-25) and Cuyahoga (AG-26). Some of the crew from these boats are on the dock, taking a much needed rest before beginning the next leg of their journey. From here they will proceed to Key West Florida, to begin their shakedown cruise to Cuba. (Naval History and Heritage Command)

29b. A wonderful look at PTC-1, one of the first Submarine Chasers built according to the contract. Here in her cradle, she is hooked into the dock side crane and awaits launching into the boat basin at Elco. She will begin her trails soon after launching. (PT Boats Inc.)

30. After being launched, we see PTC-1 on her trials. Notice they were identical to the 70 foot PT boats, except they carried depth charge racks and Y-guns to combat submarines. This boat was placed in service on March 6,1941 and assigned to Motor Boat Submarine Chaser Squadron One, under the command of LT (jg.) John D. Bulkeley. This idea was abandoned because of failure to develop satisfactory sound gear to enable the boats to locate submarines. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

30b. Another PTC showing the unique depth-charge system in greater detail. Y-gun arbors were stowed alongside the superstructure, and charges moving aft along the rails were hoisted up the inclined racks. Her Dewandre Turrets are covered with canvas. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

31. A look into the upper helm area of one of the PTC boats. As you can see the helm is identical to the PT boats. The control box to the left contains 8 plunger buttons which operate the launching of the depth charges using a solenoid. The small box is the launching key which must be switched on to provide power. Notice the plunger buttons have a safety strap over them, to prevent accidental arming. (Frank J Andruss Sr.)

32. A look at the inside of one of the boats Dewandre Turrets without the enclosed bubble. You can see some of the pipes and fittings that help operate this turret. The motive power for operating the turret was compressed air at relatively low pressure. An air compressor which was electrically driven, had the capacity of 10 cubic feet of free air per minute supplies air to a flask, of 1 cubic foot capacity at maximum pressure of about 240 pounds per square inch. When the air pressure in the flask falls to 150 pounds per square inch, the air compressor automatically starts and recharges it. As you can see, there was not much room for a gunner in here and very small ammo capacity boxes. (Irwin Chase)

32b. One of the PTC 70 footers which were numbered 1-12, races up Naragansett Bay, after passing the Mt. Hope Bridge. Opened in October 1929, the bridge is located at the mouth of the Taunton River, on the border of Massachusetts and Rhode Island. It connects the Rhode Island towns of Bristol and Portsmouth. The boat is heading to Newport to join her sisters and the tender USS Niagara, which at the time was set up as a familiarization school aboard the tender for prospective PT personnel. These boats were transferred to Great Britain in the spring of 1941.(Naval War College Archives)

33. A rare look at a color photo of of the Elco 70 footers. On this day they are docked in Florida. With winters in New York hampering operations, the boats would head to Florida with their scheduled base being in Key West. They would remain here in the cold weather and return to New York in May 1941. (Kingston Winget)

34. Another color photo showing the boats in Key West Florida. Their Dewandre turrets are covered with canvas as well as the aft torpedo tubes. Duty on the boats here was much more conducive to underway training, and from the looks of things a pleasant area to be stationed. (Kingston Winget)

35. This is a line drawing of PT-9 showing her starboard side and overhead look as was designed by Scott-Paine and constructed by the British Power Boat Company. This was the boat that would be shipped back to Elco, and was the starting point for the Elco 70 foot PT boats. (Drawing by Al Ross)

36. Beautiful artist rendition of the first of Elco’s 70 foot designed boats. PT-10 as she was built and painted coming out of the factory. A nice look at her starboard side and her deck arrangements from over-head. (Drawing by Al Ross)

37. This drawing shows one of the PTC submarine chaser boats built by Elco. Identical to the PT boats 10-19, these were set up for submarine duty. Starboard side and topside view show these boats as they came out of the factory, complete with depth charge racks and Y-guns. (Drawing by Al Ross)