The 80 foot design

Chapter three photo descriptions

1. Eighty-foot designed PT boats take up plenty of space inside Building 21 under construction. Here PT-103, the first of the eighty-footers begins life from this jig. The hull will take shape as frames are added. (Irwin Chase)

1b. Frames are being added to the jig on this boat, which consist of 69 frames and the transom spaced differently depending on the load to be carried. The bottoms of the frames from the bow aft to the tank compartment are laminated of spruce, white oak, and mahogany. The remainder of the frames and the upper part of the forward frames are made of mahogany with a narrow white oak capping on the inner side. The boat to the left has the mahogany planking installed on her hull. Boats forward are in another phase of assembly, and have been turned over to begin work on the deck. Notice the two workers handling one of the numbered frames that shows a water tight door, which will lead to other compartments. (PT Boats Inc.)

2. The boat to the lower right of the photo has the frames are in place, longitudinal battens are let into the main frames from the bow to the forward end of the tank compartment where they are scarfed into a solid layer of mahogany planking which extends under the entire tank compartment. Battens are similarly being scarfed into the after end of the tank-compartment inner planking, but from that point to the transom the battens run on top of the frames with spruce spacers in between forming a solid flat foundation for the planking from the forward end of the tank compartment to the stern (Irwin Chase)

2b. The first layer of planking is attached to the hull. Planking was Mahogany in two layers, laid diagonally in opposite directions. The hull when completed will have taken some 400,000 rivets and screws to complete the job. (Irwin Chase)

3. A popular custom was the turning of the hull, after the planking process was completed. Workers from different Departments were chosen for this ceremony as well as other dignitaries, war bond sponsors, and Navy personnel. With the hull turned over using heavy winches it could now proceed to the next phase of assembly. Here Electrical Department worker Gladys O’Reily was chosen to turn this hull, which has been adorned with a sign, thanking the people of the Virgin Islands for playing their part in the war effort. (Irwin Chase)

3b. Worker in the assembly area is going over the plumbing, which will be installed in the engine room of this boat. All Piping and fittings were of aluminum to all fixtures. One of Elco’s mechanical engineer’s is checking out the piece making sure connections will hold tight under combat conditions. (PT Boats Inc.)

4. With the hulls now turned over, more phases of assembly can be completed. Here we see the helm area which has been added to the boat, while the boat next to it, workers are assembling the boats day room cabin. (Irwin Chase.)

5. Elco worker completing the boats day room cabin, using an electric hand drill. He is sinking the hundreds of screws in this assembly process. The cabin was built of spruce frames with curved mahogany corners and covered on both sides with light plywood. The space between the frames in the superstructure is insulated with cork and the whole house will be covered with airplane fabric, doped and painted. (PT Boats Inc.)

5b. In Building 21 we get a good look at one of the steel cradles on wheels. These cradles were fabricated from steel I-beams to move the boats around the yard. The hull supports were shaped wood beams laying on top of steel I-beams. The structure sits on wheel sets, with "tillers" at each end, making the wheel sets swivel. Once the boats are turned over, they are placed into the cradle and will remain here right up until being rolled out of assemble and into the launching crane, where it will be gently placed into the boat basin. These cradles weighed just over 11 tons. (PT Boats Inc.)

6. One of several shops that were set up in the assembly building. This one showing several work benches in which intricate parts of the boat are being worked on. To the right of the photo we see five 4M-2500 Packard Marine Engines that gave the boats life. The boats in the background assembly area tower over the shop area. The boat third from the left is PT-322. (PT Boats Inc.)

7. This women from the paint shop is getting the Eclipse paint sprayer ready for spraying the enteral bulkheads. The entire interior was painted with one coat of primer, glazed as required, and two coats of fire retardant white paint. An extra coat of enamel was applied to the surfaces adjacent to passageways, areas of traffic, and confined spaces as directed by the Supervisor, where personnel traffic would render the fire retardant paint difficult to maintain. The sprayers used at Elco were provided by the Eclipse Air Brush Company in Newark, New Jersey.(PT Boats Inc.)

7b. PT boats ran three 4M-2500 Packard Marine Engines and in so doing the boats had three props each. The boats at delivery had one 28” x 28” propeller for the center shaft, and one 28” x 29” propeller for each wing shaft. Each boat would be given one center prop and two wing props as spares when delivered with each boat. Each prop was unpainted manganese bronze with right hand turning props. With right-hand turning propellers there was a slight torque, or tendency for the vessel to go to the left with her engines ahead and rudder amidships. (PT Boats Inc.)

8. Elco boats had six mufflers attached to their transom, three on the port side and three on the starboard side. They were constructed of mostly copper and bronze. Mufflers were used by PT's for silent running by feeding the exhaust out under the water at low speeds. They each had butterfly flap valves fitted in the main exhaust pipes after the muffler take off which were operated by a lever system to allow straight through exhaust for running at higher speed or to direct the exhaust down through the mufflers to silence the boat at low speed. When exhaust was sent out beneath the water the boats could run in basically a silent mode, making them less noticeable to the enemy. They were constructed by the Van Blerck & Son company of New York. This photo shows the boats port-side mufflers. (PT Boats Inc.)

8b. Auxiliary Firemen have taken up station in the boats forward crew’s quarters. Here they are vacuuming out the bilges, making sure all saw dust and other materials have been removed before delivery. The white doors with the holes in them, are for the crews belongings, the holes to keep clothing from collecting mold and mildew. (Irwin Chase.)

9. Each Elco boat carried three aluminum gasoline tanks. From left we see one of the wing tanks, the center tank, and the second wing tank. They have just been painted before being lowered into the boat. Each tank held a certain amount with the center tank carrying 1300 gallons, and the port and starboard wing tanks carrying 850 gallons each. Each boat could carry 3,000 total gallons of high octane gasoline. These large tanks were carried under the day-room with the first boats not have self sealing tanks, but this would change during the production run. A PT boat self-sealing gasoline tank" refers to a design with a special self-sealing material that could automatically seal punctures caused by enemy fire, minimizing fuel leaks in combat situations; essentially, when hit by a bullet or shrapnel, the tank's inner lining would expand to plug the hole, preventing major fuel spills and potential fires. (Irwin Chase)

9b. Nicknamed the Elco Engine room gang, these workers are busy inside the boats engine room compartment. The two workers in the rear are working on the plumbing which is attached to the aft watertight compartment. The worker seated with the hat on has a drill next to him, while the other worker is handing him a combination square. Notice the girders and engine beds that will soon hold the three 4M-2500 Packard Marine Engines. (Ed Behney)

10. Engines were delivered from the Packard Motor Car Company in Detroit, to Elco. They were packed in this type of crate with instructions to remove the lag screws from each side and door top. The engines came secured to a skid and would carefully be removed using a winch. Engines would come by rail which ran to the back of the Elco property. (PT Boats Inc.)

10b. Each boat carried three 4M-2500 Super-charged gasoline engines. These power plants were a four-stroke, 60-degree V-12 engine. They had a 6.40 inch bore and a 6.50 inch stroke, which brought it to 2,490 cubic inches, with four valves per cylinder. They had an aluminum block with steel cylinder sleeves, weighing in at 2,950 pounds. Each engine carried a centrifugal super-charger, with a Holly 1685F Aircraft carburetor supplying the fuel. The engines were dry sump with an external oil tank which had baffles to reduce foaming. The engines were fresh water cooled via fairly small tube type heat ex-changers, as were the V-drives. The first engines developed 1,250 hp, but as the war progressed, we would see this increased to 1,500 hp. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

11. The early eighty-foot boats had these MK-18 Mod. 1 torpedo tubes. The Mark VIII or (Mark 8) with the smaller warhead and the Mark XIV or (Mark 14) with the larger warhead were both used on USN PT boats. Both with 21 inch diameter to fit the standard USN tubes. These MK-18 Mod. 1 tubes were built by the Whitlock Manufacturing Company in Hartford, Connecticut. Launching the torpedoes from these tubes was done by utilizing a black powder launching charge. Sadly these torpedoes were dismal in combat, as they were an obsolete relic from World War One. They had a slow speed (27 knots), a small warhead containing 300 pounds of TNT, a tendency to run wild when set for shallow depth, and a defective exploder that would detonate prematurely, if it exploded at all. It was later estimated that sixty-three percent of the MK-VIII torpedoes fired from these tubes had service issues. It wasn’t until mid 1943 to early 1944, that the boats torpedo’s would be upgraded and these tubes removed from the boats. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

12. Here we see one of the heads that was on the 80 footer. This was the officers head, with the crews head being in the fore-peak of the boat. Notice the stainless steel sink with which a pump was used to bring water to the basin. This compartment was fitted with medicine cabinet on the after bulkhead, and a frame-less mirror on the forward bulkhead, also, with three grab rails, located on the forward and after bulkhead. Toilet fixtures included a paper holder and soap dish, the grab rails being placed as to function as towel bars. Access to the compartment was through doorway with curtain. The toilet was a hand pump that would release into a holding tank that released into the sea. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

12b. The galley on the Elco 80 footer was spacious in regards to other boats. It was located to starboard from the center line between watertight bulkheads and entered forward through a door. The small sink had over-all dimensions of 14 by 20 by 6 inches and was a commercial porcelain enamel type, with strainer and drain plug. The galley had cupboards made of western red cedar with door frames of mahogany, and two shelves each with ledges, were built below the sink board and counter. Cupboard space outboard above refrigerator were fitted with partitions and doors, also racks and cutlery drawers to stow specified galley equipment. The small stove was a 24-volt D. C. unit with a latch for anchoring the oven in place, and provided with rough water utensil keepers. A small refrigerator was also provided that was roughly 8 cubic feet, and had its own evaporator unit and ice trays. (PT Boats Inc.)

13. Two sailors look to be enjoying the comfort afforded them by comfortable bunk space and spacious quarters. Above them are the upper bunk areas, and to the left of the photo we see the mahogany drop down table which would be used for crew meals. Upholstery, mattresses, and cushions for below deck comfort were provided by the Atlantic Pacific Mfg. Corporation of Brooklyn, NY. (PT Boats Inc.)

14. An inside look at the crews quarters looking forward. Here you get a good look at the crews lockers with air holes, and the roomy bunks. The door to the right led to the crews head. Notice the area has been painted with a bright white paint, that made it easier to see below decks. There are also over-head lights in this compartment for night use. (PT Boats Inc.)

15. A look inside the starboard side of the forward crews quarters looking aft. You can see the Mahogany drop down table for the crew meals. The water tight door leads into the boats Galley, with the crews bunk area being very comfortable with good mattresses. Flooring in this area was aluminum alloy, covered in an anti skid safety coating which resisted abrasion and wear. (PT Boats Inc.)

15b. The day room cabin (looking aft) onboard the 103 class boats was considered at the time, to be that of a lounge area for the crew. It was pretty spacious and had six cabin windows, three to a side, for more air. It was located above the fuel tank compartment between watertight bulkheads, with a non watertight door to forward quarters, and sound-insulating door and hatch in after bulkhead to engine room. All of the furnishings above the day room floor were easily removable, so that flooring and tank side panels could be removed for inspection or service of the tanks. In the starboard forward corner, a hatch of at least 22 inches square was cut, with a hinge back top, to provide an exit from the day room, using a steel ladder with tubular rungs mounted on the house side. It had two couches that faced one another for comfort in mind. Potable water was carried in a single 200-gallon tank located in the bilge under the chart room. (PT Boats Inc.)

16. A look inside the boats engine room, showing one of three 4M-2500 Packard Marine Engines. This starboard side wing engine, was the battle station of the engineer on duty. A seat for the engineer is provided on the starboard engine from which he can start the engines, observe the instrument panel, control the spark and scoops, and shift clutches. To his right up high on the bulk head is the starting panel switches for starting the engines. The tractor levers in front of him are for shifting the engines into gear for forward, neutral and reverse. (PT Boats Inc.)

16b. A wonderful look into the boats engine room looking forward. We see the back of the engineers seat to starboard and to center, we see the ladder leading topside. The electrical system of the Packard Marine engine is similar to the electrical system used in automobiles as is used an electrical starter, generator, generator regulator, and storage battery. The panel to the left of the ladder shows the main electrical panel, which showed battery ammeters, engine room load switch, battery circuit breaker switches and other electrical instruments which the engineer maintained. To the right of the ladder is the main instrument panel for oil and water temperature gauges, engine annunciator’s which relayed the captains signals for the engine shifting levers, RPM and Manifold pressure gauges. (PT Boats Inc.)

17. Starboard side look at the engine room looking aft. Just forward of the engineers seat is the boats auxiliary generator. This generator was a very vital piece of equipment, as it would run the boats cook top, refrigerator, coffee maker, and chart-house that needed this reliable source of current to run equipment. This gasoline powered generator would be used, when the engines were not running. Great care was needed to insure it would be running when needed. White pipes are exhaust which lead out to the boats transom. (PT Boats Inc.)

18. Engine room main battery panel. The engineer in the engine room would make sure that batteries were producing enough current for items such as the galley, port and starboard batteries, main engine batteries, aux generators, main engine aux generators and more. (PT Boats Inc.)

19. This was the area known as the Lazarette. It was the last compartment at the stern of the boat, and was originally designed for a work space. It was accessible through a hinged deck hatch with metal ladder to floor, and through a watertight door in after bulkhead of engine room. In this space was the auxiliary steering apparatus, where if need be they could rig an emergency tiller. It would become a perfect spot for storing gear, such as oil and paint cans, lubrication gear, smoke generator parts, and even extra ammunition. Notice the small work bench area, exhaust pipes and ladder to topside. (PT Boats Inc.)

20. The M-2 Aircraft 50 caliber machine gun was used on PT boats. The M-2 had a shorter barrel and weighed less then the standard 50 caliber. It had a higher rate of fire as well, although a shorter range. The basic aircraft gun came without a trigger or the side bracket with the charging handle called the retracting slide group (RSG). PT boats used this basic gun along with a mount supplied trigger and usually a simple bolt handle for charging the gun instead of the RSG. Unlike the RSG, which operates against a short stud and remains stationary during firing, the bolt handle travels back and forth with the bolt. On the MK 17 mount, the upper and lower triggers operated both guns. The boats had two gun tubes carrying twin 50 caliber machine guns with, one port side mid ships attached to day room cabin, and one starboard side opposite the helm. This photo shows the guns that were on the port side of the boat. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

21. The standard weapon that was added to the 103 class boats was the 20mm Oerlikon Gun. The gun Swiss in its design, was manufactured originally by the Oerlikon Machine tool works. This gun was a close range, high angle, anti aircraft gun, which was singly mounted on a pedestal. The gun could be trained through 360 degrees. The gun could be fired automatically, as long as the trigger was pressed, and their was ammunition in the magazine. This weapon carried a cylindrical drum which held 60 rounds of tracer and high explosive rounds. The mount was a heavy Mark IV mount which was actually used on destroyers. Later the mount would be removed in favor of a light weight mount, which saved a good deal of extra weight. The gun was mounted on the stern of the 103 class boats coming out of the factory. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

22. The helm area of the 103 class boats. The three throttles to the left were controlled by the Captain, and when engaged in forward, neutral, or reverse, it registered with the engineer, in the engine room. In that way he knew in what position he would shift the engines. To the right of the throttle box is a long piece of metal, which was the speed control lever. The center or main control panel shows the three top rpm gauges, while the bottom three were the manifold pressure gauges. Around the main panel are plunger buttons, and switches that controlled engine room signal buzzer, stern lights, navigational horn, main control switch, aft signal, lock out signal switch, and more. The hinged box to the right of the control panel when opened contained the switches for launching the four torpedoes. Notice the metal wheel, which on the top has a suicide knob built in, making turning the boat much easier. (PT Boats Inc.)

23. Mr. and Mrs. John D. Bulkeley on the launching stage. Mr. George Hicks from the National Broadcast Company conducted the on air ceremonies, with music provided by the Richmond County American Legion Band of Staten Island. The Master of ceremonies was Henry R. Sutphen Executive Vice President of Elco, and the speakers were Govenor Charles A. Edison, Lt. John D. Bulkeley, Mayor James J. Donovan, and Rear Admiral Adolphus Andrews. Moving pictures were taken for the News reels. (Glenville Tremaine)

23b. With much delight and excitement on Saturday May 16, 1942, Elco began their grand ceremony around 4:30pm, with the launching of PT-103. This would be the companies first eighty-foot Elco designed boat coming off the assembly line. With the boat hooked up to the dock side crane, it would be christened by Mrs. John D. Bulkeley. Here Lieutenant Bulkeley addresses the hundreds of workers and guests that have turned out for this very special day. He would tell the workers that he has seen first hand the production in action and tells them “Well Done”. Bulkeley tells the workers that in a sense the placing of a torpedo into an enemy ship, is a final culmination of our combined efforts, the efforts of each of you workers. (Glenville Tremaine)

23c. PT-103 has been hooked into the cradle. She is slowly lowered into the boat basin by the dockside crane. It will be the first time she will be floating on her newly constructed hull. (Irwin Chase)

24. With hundreds of workers and guests in attendance, PT-103 sits in the boat basin. On the ceremony stand with backs to the photo, is Executive Vice President of Elco Henry R. Sutphen, and to his left is the sponsor Mrs. John D. Bulkeley with bouquet of flowers. She is now floating on her hull for the first time, as the engine crew is beginning to start up her three engines. This would be a momentous occasion for Elco, as this new designed boat, would be just the start for more eighty-footers to come off the assembly line. (Irwin Chase.)

25. PT-103 at the dock, shortly after her launching. Notice on the port side the boats search light which was a Ray Line, exclusive design by Elco. They were powerful lights that could spot both hazards and enemy craft in the darkness. These class boats used the lights made by the Portable Light Company of New York. To the left is Lieut. Frank W. Rowe, Assistant Supervisor of Ship Building for Elco, Captain George A. Alexander, and Elco’s Executive Vice President Henry R. Sutphen. (Irwin Chase)

26. Another look at the newly launched PT-103 at the main boat basin. The officer on the deck looking away from the camera is Lt. Cmdr. Frank W. Rowe, Elco’s Assistant Supervisor of Shipbuilding, inside the helm with leather skull cap on is Managing Constructor of Elco, Irwin Chase. Others in the helm are engineers that will begin testing all components. Behind Chase is Robert Montgomery, who served with Squadron 5 commanding PT-105, Later he would become a famous actor, having the lead in the movie “They were Expendable” about the exploits of PT Boats in the Philippines with Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron 3, portraying Lt. John D. Bulkeley. (Irwin Chase)

27. A port-side side run showing PT-103 in all her glory. Her beautiful lines are unmistakable, and she looks majestic gliding across the water. It is easily mistaken when looking at her to think she was made for pleasure, when in reality she was built for war. At this point the boat is still in Elco hands, as the sign reads run number 29. The men on the boat are part of the Elco trial crew and will test all of the boats components, making sure the boat is 100 per cent before turning her over to the US Navy. The Navy however will run their own tests as well, before shipping the boat to her operating squadron. (Frank W. Rowe)

27b. A wonderful hand built model of PT-103, constructed by Hull Department employee Donald Rosencrantz. Elco had him build this for the special launching ceremonies, and was on display inside the entrance to the main office. Rosencrantz would build several models for the company over the years, using a combination of wood and white metal parts. (PT Boats Inc.)

28. With the success of the eighty-foot design, Elco would continue to turn out these boats, one every 60 hours. After being towed out of the assembly building, they would make their way to the dockside crane, being gently lowered into the basin. To make room in the assembly building, the boats would be towed to the outdoor boat shed, where more assembly would take place. Here one of the boats is in the outdoor boat shed where it will undergo more assembly. Once again she will be towed, this time to building 16, the wet boat basin for many of the final assemblies. (PT Boats Inc.)

28b. An outside look at building 16, the wet boat basin. Up to six boats could be docked here for many of the boats final assemblies. The doors could be opened in the summer months, and closed in the winter as this building was heated. The boats typically needed to "soak" or remain submerged in water for several days to allow the wood to fully absorb moisture and expand, creating a tight seal between the planks and preventing leaks. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

29. An inside look at the wet boat basin showing one of the eighty-footers. You get a good look at her helm area, and how simplified her bridge controls were. To the right is the door leading to the boats chart-house and below deck crews quarters. The aluminum pole to the left is for the boats search light. (PT Boats Inc.)

29b. This boat inside the wet boat basin will continue with her assembly of weapons systems, ammo boxes, torpedo racks, and other sub assembly work. We see a good look at the starboard side 50 caliber gun turret, as the guns will be checked here for clearances. The rails around the turret, are gun depressor rails which were installed, so that gunners could not shoot into their own boat. All systems will be checked here, and then re-checked. (PT Boats Inc.)

30. Now that the boats have left the wet boat basin for fitting out, they would be towed to the fuel barge. Elco did not have any underground gasoline tanks on her property. They had this fuel barge from Gulf Marine which was inside the boat basin, and fueled the boats as needed. Here PT-175 is backed up to the barge. We are seeing the tail end of the fuel barge with a floating dock tide behind her. It’s not a big barge by today’s standards, with this one being 30’x 90/120’. The house on the barge is for pumps and generators, which is used for self propulsion. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

30b. The tractor at Elco was an Austin Western, 4-44 model that featured all wheel drive, and was an all wheel steer tractor. They were manufactured in Aurora, Illinois, and were used at Elco for removing completed boats from the main assembly building and moving them to other areas of assembly and to the dockside crane for launching. (Naval War College Archives)

31. A nice beautiful port-side look of the PT-117. This was another 103 class eighty-footer. Her lines are unmistakable and offer a look into a design that was second to none. Still in Elco hands she will like sisters, undergo much testing to make sure there are no errors, before being turned over to the Navy. (Irwin Chase)

32. As the war progressed reports from the forward areas were always sending back information to Elco. This was a very important aspect of development, as boat crews made suggestions as to armament, torpedoes, and other areas in which the boats could be improved. As Elco took these suggestions and studied their worth, changes in the newer boats were taking place. As the 103 class boats, numbered to PT-196 came to a close, sub classes of the boats were being being upgraded. Here is a photo of one of those upgrades as a 20mm Orelikon cannon has been added to the bow. She is still in Elco hands in this photo. (PT Boats Inc.)

33. Several of the Elco 80 foot boats would make their way to the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center, serving with Squadron 4. Here PT-141 shows her forward torpedoes in place, but her aft torpedoes have been substituted for Depth charges. She still retains her factory installed 20mm cannon on the stern, and her bow is still empty of later armament upgrades. (Charles B. Jones)

34. The dockside crane gets set to gently place another boat into the boat basin. This time it is PT-131. Miss Marion Sutphen and Lt. Cmdr John D. Bulkeley would christen the boat in a ceremony held at the plant. The boat would go on to serve with Squadron 7 in the New Guinea area of the Pacific. This squadron was awarded the Navy Unit Commendation for action in the New Guinea area from April 1, 1944, to February 1, 1945. (Irwin Chase)

35. A great look at PT boats coming and going from the Elco Yacht boat basin. The boat coming into the basin is PT-345. As you can see her mast is in the stowed position, her forward gun on the bow has not yet been assembled onto the mount, her machine gun turrets are covered, as well as the stern mounted 20mm cannon. Notice the traffic of PT boats that are operating in Newark Bay. (PT Boats Inc.)

36. Port side view of PT-377 as she leaves the boat basin at Elco. Notice she carries a forward 20mm cannon on her bow, although she still has the old style MK-18 torpedo tubes. Later these tubes would be replaced by the roll off racks and the newer MK-III torpedoes. Looking forward of the two aft ventilators, her engine room hatch has been completely redesigned to make access easier and allow for better ventilation below deck. (PT Boats Inc.)

36b. Later war Elco showing them laying down the decking. A very good photo showing the workers at Elco with an outside section of Plywood Decking about to lay it down on the decking frames. This section runs just about the full length of the Boat (allowing for the center sections). This would replace the planked decking that could be found on the earlier boats. Elco needed to stop using mahogany (especially the preferred African) since they were always having problems obtaining it. Also, plywood decking was one of primary original designs on the experimental boats. Only 80" Elco's PT-103-196, 314-367, and 372-383 had planked decks, later boats had plywood decks. (Frank J. Andruss Sr.)

37. Eight PT boats that will eventually form Squadron 25 have assembled in the Yacht boat basin at Elco. Several of these boats have their forward MK-18 torpedo tubes and depth charges at the stern. All but two of the boats have their SO-Radar masts in the lowered position. Many of the boats will have radar installed which gave them a distinct advantage over the enemy. Early boats did not have radar installed. Some of the boats also have their torpedo tube covers on to protect the tube from the salt water spray, which others have canvas attached to these openings. The 20mm cannons on their bows have not yet been added to the mounts. (PT Boats Inc.)

37b. PT-556 has been pulled into the outdoor boat shed. Looking as though she is almost completed, the boat is awaiting her MK-XIII torpedoes. Canvas covers are added to the boats two gun turrets. Note that the radar mast has been folded down. Masts on Elco boats folded back to the center line, at a 70 degree angle to clear the after fifty caliber turret. The boat would serve with Squadron 29 in the Mediterranean. (Naval War College Archives)

38. PT-731 has been attached to the twin boom crane and is swung out over the basin. The 731-760 boats were built expressly for the Soviets. Only the lead boat (PT-731) was actually built at Elco, the remainder being shipped as "kits" for the Soviets to assemble. (PT Boats Inc.)

38b. PT-731 has now been placed into the boat basin. Here you can clearly see her MK-19 torpedo tubes. These tubes were fired using compressed air and were fitted with an internal heater to deal with the cold climate of the Soviet Union. From here she will be towed to the wet boat basin for the next phase of her assembly. (PT Boats Inc.)

39. Here we see the Elco work boat, nicknamed “Pee Tee” in the main boat basin. This boat would be used to tow the PT boats to areas of assembly and to the fuel barge. It would also be used to tow in barges and other supplies that were off-loaded by ship outside of the plant. It would continue to operate after the war until the plant closed in 1949. (PT Boats Inc.)

40. This photo was taken in the winter months, but weather did not stop the company from their continued efforts, in producing the PT boats. Underway trials continued in the winter, a cold but necessary step in getting the boats to their intended squadrons. To the man’s left just below his hand, and (on the starboard bulkhead) of the day-room cabin, is what was known as a Lux Pull Box. It was used for the CO2 Fire Extinguishing system. The CO2 tanks were installed in the same location with manual releases on the port side aft of the bridge and outside of the engine room hatch. No automatic discharge for the fire extinguisher system was provided. Potable water was carried in a single 200-gallon tank located in the bilge under the chart house. Just underneath the cabin window was a window drain scoop. The raised apparatus on the deck was a mushroom vent, which was located port and starboard over the boats wing gasoline tanks, and two more located in the area over the rudder compartment. They were used to allow for ventilation, air circulation and air exchange. (PT Boats Inc.)

41. Beautiful port side look at PT-543. She is just outside the Elco break water and has been undergoing testing. She carries four MK-XIII torpedo tubes in roll off racks and a 20mm cannon on her bow. In this photo she carries a regular mast, but that will be updated to carry the SO Radar mast. Not yet added is the boats 37mm auto cannon, and 40mm Bofor’s gun. After being turned over to the US Navy, she would serve with Squadron 37 in the Pacific. (Glenville Tremaine)

42. Wonderful artist rendition of Elco’s first assembled 80 foot boat, PT-103. This is how the boat looked and was painted coming off the assembly line. This class ran to PT-196. (Al Ross Drawing)

42b. The next class of 80 foot boat began with the number PT-314-367 as this artist rendition depicts these next class boats in the colors coming out of the assembly building. One of the changes to the boats was the redesigned engine room hatch, which had easier access and better air flow. Vents around the hatch were also re-positioned, and the heavy MK-4 pedestal mount for the stern 20mm cannon has been updated to the lightweight MK-14 mount. (Al Ross Drawing)

43. The next 80 foot class of boat would be PT-373-383. This again depicts the boat as built at Elco coming off the assembly line. Notice at this point the two toned gray colors have now been replaced with the preferred green tones, and a 20mm cannon, with MK-14 mount has been added to the port side bow. (Al Ross Drawing)

43b. The next class 80 foot boats would be PT-486-563. This drawing once again depicts the boats as they looked coming off the assembly line. Notice these were the first boats being painted using a camouflaged color, and they have the upgraded MK-XIII torpedoes and roll off racks, as well as the factory added SO-radar. (Al Ross Drawing)

44. The next class of 80 foot boats would be PT-565-624. One can clearly see the changes topside with these boats coming out of assembly. They carry a 37mm auto cannon on the bow, as well as a 20mm cannon. On the stern is the factory installed 40mm single Bofor’s gun. She also carries the type 50 Rocket Launcher, that were used on the PT BOATS for added fire-power. Installed is the most up to date radar system to be used the SO-3. It should be noted that PT-623 and PT-624 construction was canceled in September of 1945. (Al Ross Drawing)

44b. This last class of 80 footers were built as knock down kits for shipment and assembly in the Soviet Union, and numbered PT-731-790. It should be noted that these boats were built to Soviet specs and included the MK-19 torpedo tubes, which were heated and needed in the cold climate in Russia. They also carry the earlier So-Radar. PT-761-790 had their construction canceled in August 1945. (Al Ross Drawing)