Chapter 6

End of an Era

When the war ended, the Elco Naval Division had over 1000 workers that had not only made PT BOATS but pleasure craft before that. Elco tried to keep them on the payroll but it was becoming very difficult. Elco struggled. In its woodworking facilities, Elco augmented yacht-building with other work, including manufacturing baseball bats tested by the Chicago Cubs during spring training one year, building bowling pins and wood lanes for bowling alleys, and crafting the wood work for the old “Woodies” a special edition Plymouth station wagon. By this time Elco was just a small branch of the much larger Electric Boat conglomeration, an empire later known as General Dynamics Corporation.

They built boats like the Eco 35’ Cruiser efficiently designed for easy riding, and claimed that it had a PT proven underbelly that cut hull resistance, that boosted speed per horse power. It had a fully equipped galley, lavatory, full size berths, and plenty of storage space below decks. All copper tanks and plumbing throughout the boat. These were offered in 1947 with five sizes from 27, 35, 40, 47, and 62 feet.

They built the beautiful top of the line 1947 62’ Motor Yacht. A luxurious motor yacht with comfortable accommodations for seven guest’s and two crew. This had a flying bridge, and was offered in both gasoline and diesel engines. The boat was beautifully finished with incredible attention to fittings, upholstery, and furnishings. African Mahogany throughout the boat, Eco spared no expense in making this one of the nicest yachts on the market.

Lacking proper support from what became General Dynamics’s upper management, Elco was not given a chance to transition through the immediate post-war economy. By1948, it was just a small branch of Electric Boat, a conglomerate handled by John Hopkins. Hopkins felt that Elco was not a profitable enterprise, and in December of 1949 the work force was let go, and the equipment, supplies and plant in Bayonne were sold.

After Elco left Bayonne, the structure was by Englander Mattress and Efka

Plastics. On September 3, 2001, a fire caused severe damage at the former Elco

Naval Division factory. The industrial structure was vacant at the time of the fire,

and had not been active for several years. The fire would sweep thru the Elco complex destroying all but two of the 19 buildings that would make up the site. It would also destroy three nearby homes and injure at least 28 people. One of the largest casualties of the fire would be the Electro Dynamic Works, which at the time employed at least 500 people in the manufacture of motors for submarines and other navy ships.

More then 500 firemen battled this blaze for more then 19 hours as flames as high as 300 feet shot into the air. A thick layer of black smoke covered the city from bay to bay form Bergen Point to the Jersey City-Bayonne city line. Three New York City fire boats poured tons of water on the flames and were credited by local officials with saving the Englander Mattress Company from being destroyed, as well as the Elco Marina and the boats moored there. The fire was believed to have started around 2:00 pm. on Saturday, April 20, 1963 in a small storage shed behind the Polytex building near Newark Bay.

It quickly engulfed the building touching off a series of explosions. Fanned by the winds coming across the Bay, the flames spread quickly to the Electro Dynamic buildings, the Englander warehouse area and three homes on Schulyer Court. The winds gusting to 32 miles per hour, tossed burning cinders across Avenue A and started fires on lawns and roofs along North Street and Avenue A.

The main fire would be fought by firemen from Bayonne, the Bayonne Naval Supply Center, Jersey City, Elizabeth, Weehawken, North Bergen and West New York One of the most dramatic moments of the fire was the rescue of seven firemen trapped by the flames at the end of the pier where they were manning pumps, drawing water from the bay.

They were saved by the Sea Scout Ship 7, skippered by Al Wiedow. This fire would mark the end of Elco as a complex, although building 21, the main assembly plant for the PT boats would be saved, as well as the dockside crane. Building 21 would later be completely destroyed and demolished some 39 years later, when vandals set fire to it in 2002.

The engineer’s report concluded that the main industrial building should be condemned and demolished. This recommendation applied only to the main structure. The Elco Marina clubhouse, the dockside crane, and other free-standing structures nearby were not harmed in the fire and were excluded from the

recommended demolition.

The crane, recovered from the Elco Naval Division in Bayonne, lifted the PT boatsfrom land and lowered them into Newark Bay. It serves as a reminder of theimportant role that Bayonne played in World War II, recalling the men and womenemployed by the Electric Launch Company (Elco), the servicemen who commanded and worked aboard the Patrol Torpedo (PT) boats that were built in Bayonne, and the innovation of the Electric Launch Company.

The Elco Crane is now in Richard A. Rutkowski Park at the Hackensack River Walk in Bayonne, on Newark Bay, west of 52nd -54th Streets (Block 12, Lot 3) In 2003 the crane was removed from its original location on Newark Bay to make way for the Boat Works housing development, which is located roughly two miles to the south of the park. The crane was dismantled and stored while this park was being completed.

Baker Residential had promised the people of Bayonne that it would restore the crane. On October 18, 2006 they made that promise come true as Bayonne city officials joined Baker residential and other invited guests for ceremonies. This special day was to dedicate the restored Elco Crane in its new site at Mayor Richard A. Rutkowski Park.

Once again the Crane stands tall, looking like she did when so many PT boats and pleasure craft were launched at Elco. Baker Residential also dedicated a plaque commemorating the Elco plant along the waterfront walkway, overlooking Newark Bay at the Boat-works site. Building 21, the main assembly building for the PT Boats was saved, as well as the attached offices of Building 20.

One thing is for certain Elco had a great business from its inception in 1892. It was run by Henry R. Sutphen for all but the first three of those years. Elco built pleasure craft in peacetime and large numbers of high-speed boats during both world wars. When the company started out, with a contract for 55 boats for the Chicago World's Fair, the hulls were subcontracted, but in 1902 they built their own yard in Bayonne, at the foot of North Street and extending northeast for six blocks.

Elco was the front runner in PT boat production, with six Army/Navy E awards being presented to the company for excellence in producing their boats for the war effort.

Elco strived to conduct themselves to the highest standard during the building of the PT boats. They worked tirelessly for a brighter future and better days after the war, in hopes of lasting peace. It was apparent that Elco its employees, and management filled an important niche, in the over-all production of the boats. The men who rode these wonderful boats did the Elco company proud, as Lt. John Bulkley won the Congressional Medal of Honor for his PT boat exploits during the opening days of the war. Lt. A. Murray Preston also won a Congressional Medal of Honor for his daring rescue of a downed flier 200 yards from enemy gun positions in 1944. Twenty-two Navy Crosses were awarded to PT crewmen, along with hundreds of lesser citations.

Today, outside of the boatworks complex sits the Elco Marina. It is set up just about opposite where the main assembly building would have been during the war. It offers easy access to the Kill Van Kull River inlet, and is minutes away from the Bayonne Bridge. Baker Residential which built Boat Works complex, also remembered to honor those men and women that worked at Elco, with a wonderful plaque and memorial. It sits in a quiet area on the site with benches and retaining wall. Elco certainly made the people of Bayonne proud in what they accomplished during the war years. Hopefully the sacrifices that were made will never be forgotten. It is truly the end of an era.