Chapter 3

The 80 footer

The new PT boat design for Elco would be the eighty-foot boat. The Bu Ships wanted a boat that was a maximum of 82 feet, which was felt could be transported easily and successfully.

The boat would still use the standard Packard Marine Engine power plant, but it was decided that they wanted a boat that could run silent at low power. Luckily for Elco, Irwin Chase their chief designer at the time, was an expert on mufflers. He had just designed three types of them for the British, which they felt was very satisfactory. It was also decided that these new boats would carry three-thousand-gallons of fuel.

The trial speed would be set at forty knots fully loaded, with the speed being sustained for at least one hour. The boat had to have accommodations for one officer and a crew of eight men, with spare accommodations for one officer, and forty-eight hours supply for provisions. They would set the cruising radius for 500 miles.

The ordnance load did not vary greatly from the seventy-seven-footer, with specifications calling for four 21 inch torpedo tubes, four.50 caliber machine guns, one thirty-two gallon smoke generator, and stowage capacity for 1000 round per barrel of.50 caliber ammunition.

The hull had to be of the lightest weight, consistent with adequate strength, stiffness, and durability for the service intended, with an eye to simplicity for mass production. Elco speed in production was increased by eliminating the molded day room, which had been a feature on the previous seventy-seven-foot design.

The 80-foot boats were constructed similarly to the 77-foot boats in that transverse frames were prefabricated and placed upside down on a building jig. There were 69 frames and the transom spaced differently depending on the load to be carried. The bottoms of the frames from the bow aft to the tank compartment are laminated of spruce, white oak, and mahogany. The remainder of the frames and the upper part of the forward frames are made of mahogany with a narrow white oak capping on the inner side.

After the frames are in place, longitudinal battens are let into the main frames from the bow to the forward end of the tank compartment where they are scarfed into a solid layer of mahogany planking which extends under the entire tank compartment. Battens are similarly scarfed into the after end of the tank-compartment inner planking, but from that point to the transom the battens run on top of the frames with spruce spacers in between forming a solid flat foundation for the planking from the forward end of the tank compartment to the stern.

Secondary transverse frames and topside diagonal frames are similar to the 77-foot boats except that secondary frames are found in various parts of the boat where strain is excessive as well as in the forward three compartments. In the place of longitudinal deck battens, two longitudinal clamps are installed from bow to stern on either side of the deck openings for the superstructure. In addition, all the deck space between the superstructure openings has a longitudinal clamp running on the keel line. An 8-inch coaming is installed above the deck from the forward end of the superstructure to the after end of the engine room hatch. Diagonal wooden pads and stainless steel webbing under the torpedo tube foundations complete the deck framing.

Both deck and planking are bolted to a single continuous wooden member the entire length of the hull. The construction appears to be very strong and should give no difficulty. The deck is of double-planked mahogany, 3/8-inch upper and 5/16-inch lower, with marine glue and airplane fabric between the plank layers. The planks are laid fore and aft, each lower plank acting as a batten for the upper planks and fastened throughout, with brass screws.

The planking was double diagonal mahogany laid in the same manner as on the 77-foot boats. The total thickness of the topside planking is 3/4-inch, inner 5/16-inch, outer 7/16-inch. The bottom planking totals 15/16-inch; inner, 7/16-inch; outer, 1/2-inch. The fastenings to the main frames are Monel screws below the waterline and brass screws above and copper rivets or clinched nails are used for secondary fastenings. The deck houses were built of spruce frames with curved mahogany corners and covered on both sides with light plywood. The space between the frames in the superstructure was insulated with cork and the whole house is covered with airplane fabric, doped and painted. Hatches were provided to remove gas tanks and engines.

Potable water was carried in a single 200-gallon tank located in the bilge under the chart room. The CO2 tanks were also installed in the same location with manual releases on the port side aft of the bridge and outside of the engine room hatch. No automatic discharge for the fire extinguisher system was provided.

The engineering installation was almost the same as the 77-foot boats. The heat ex changer, oil tank, and expansion tank for the center engine were in the port side of the engine room: those for the wing engines were in the conventional location. A seat for the engineer was provided on the starboard engine from which he can start the engines, observe the instrument panel, control the spark and scoops, and shift clutches. A square hatch with hold-down bolts could be lifted off to remove and change out engines.

Each Elco boat carried three aluminum gasoline tanks, consisting of two wing tanks, port and starboard, and the center tank. Each tank held a certain amount with the center tank carrying 1300 gallons, and the port and starboard wing tanks carrying 850 gallons each. Each boat could carry 3,000 total gallons of high octane gasoline. These large tanks were carried under the day-room with the first boats not have self sealing tanks, but this would change during the production run. A PT boat self-sealing gasoline tank" refers to a design with a special self-sealing material that could automatically seal punctures caused by enemy fire, minimizing fuel leaks in combat situations; essentially, when hit by a bullet or shrapnel, the tank's inner lining would expand to plug the hole, preventing major fuel spills and potential fires.

The new 103 class boats would carry three 4M-2500 V-12 (super-charged) liquid-cooled, gasoline-fueled engines, made at the Packard Motor Car Company in Detroit. The engines continued to be a four-stroke, 60-degree V-12 with a 6.40-inch bore and a 6.50-inch stroke, which brought it to 2,490 cubic inches, with four valves per cylinder. With an aluminum block with steel cylinder sleeves and weighing in at 2,900 pounds, the engine had a 6.4:1 compression ratio, and a centrifugal supercharger; later models were also fitted with an inter cooler. The 103 class boat engines used 100 octane fuel, rated at 1,350 hp, with later Elco boats having 1500 hp as weights increased due to added weapons and crew.

One other item that was requested by the BuShips was the installation of depth charges and racks. Depth charges used on the new boats were of the type C-300 pound charge on a roll off rack. Depth charges used High explosives with a fuse set to detonate the charge, typically at a specific depth from the surface. Although hardly ever used against submarines, they were a deterrent against enemy ships, by dropping them at a very shallow depth in the path of the oncoming enemy.

Elco smoke generators were not mounted on the Elco 103 class until PT-115 to PT-126, thus becoming standard equipment coming out of Elco. They would be mounted parallel to the center line and was soon retrofitted to the earlier boats. The 35 gallon bottles mounted on the stern expelled titanium tetrachloride, which billowed into thick white fog when released into the atmosphere. It had a single threaded opening at one end, which was controlled by a valve. This valve is part of the bottle assembly, and the wrench that opens it is furnished with the original bottle (or generator) of smoke.

This wrench has a hinged handle so that a steel protective cap may be screwed onto the bottle over the valve assembly with the wrench attached when the generator is not in use. To spray the smoke liquid from the generator, a smoke pipe was furnished. This pipe was about two feet long and is bent slightly. On the lower end it carries a fitting to connect the pipe to the nipple on the generator valve assembly. A hinged wrench for this fitting is clipped to the smoke pipe. At the upper end the pipe is threaded to receive a single nozzle.

Four nozzles were provided, and were quickly interchangeable. They are marked for 3 min., 5 min., 8 min., or 12 min.; the time the smoke will last in a continuous screen, using the respective nozzle. The 8 min. nozzle is for use under average condition and the 12 min., nozzle is for night use. If the weather is very windy either a 3 or 5 min. nozzle would produce a better screen. With a few turns of the wrench the tanks could be discarded overboard and with the tanks ability to float would act as a decoy for attacking ships.

Once again the gun turrets would be the aircraft M-2.50 caliber twin machine guns, with changes from the earlier boats, being two turrets, one port side, attached to the day room cabin and the other starboard, opposite the bridge. They used the Mark 17 mount, which included the Cradle, Mark 9 and Carriage, Mark 9. The carriage of the mount provided unlimited train, which was accomplished by the operator exerting pressure, in the direction desired, on a winged back rest attached to the rotating carriage.

Ammunition to the guns was supplied from four boxes, two per gun, each having a capacity of 250 rounds, or 500 rounds per gun. Ammunition boxes were carried on supports attached to the rotating carriage structure. Ammunition was always packed in the boxes, so that the double loop of the link will be leading and, therefore, will be fed into the gun first. This was important because the feed mechanism of the gun will operate with a greater belt load if the double loop is fed first, for then both the cartridge-feed pawl and the holding pawl will always bear against a single thickness of the link thereby properly spacing the belt. These guns were used for anti-personnel and light anti-ship fire.

Elco boats had six mufflers attached to their transom, three on the port side and three on the starboard side. They were constructed of mostly copper and bronze. Mufflers were used by PT's for silent running by feeding the exhaust out under the water at low speeds. They each had butterfly flap valves fitted in the main exhaust pipes after the muffler take off which were operated by a lever system to allow straight through exhaust for running at higher speed or to direct the exhaust down through the mufflers to silence the boat at low speed. When exhaust was sent out beneath the water the boats could run in basically a silent mode, making them less noticeable to the enemy. They were constructed by the Van Blerck & Son company of New York. This photo shows the boats port-side mufflers.

The PT boat was designed to carry four torpedoes in tubes and to discharge them by expansion of ignited gun powder. There were two tubes on each side. Tubes train inboard for cruising and loading, and train outboard for expected action and firing. The forward tubes train outward to an angle of 8° 30' with the ship's centerline, the after tubes to an angle of 12° 30'. All torpedoes are fired forward and at the stated angles with the centerline. Before loading the torpedoes into the tubes, it was intended that the gyro in each torpedo be set to the respective angle of the tube into which it is to be loaded. The direction of setting must be such that after leaving the boat the gyro will correct the course of the torpedo to that of the boat at the instant of firing, plus the spread angle. The torpedo used would be the tube mounted MK-VIII, a 21 inch WW1 vintage model, with a top speed of only 27 knots.

It still carried the dismal record of being unreliable (60%) dud rate, with a low speed. Another issue was that the tubes were heavily lubricated with oil and grease to ensure that the torpedo was smoothly launched from the tube. Sometimes during launch, the charge would ignite the lubricants in the tube causing a fire emitting black smoke that would reveal the location of the boat. The gyro in the torpedo was sensitive when it was first launched and it would need to be launched from an even keel, otherwise the torpedo would lose stability when it hit the water. The other issue concerned the launching mechanism.

The tube was made of steel, fabricated by welding. It pivoted on an aluminum alloy turntable and turntable base. The forward end is mounted on an aluminum alloy support which travels on corrosion-resistant steel plates and is guided by brass Z-bars, cadmium plated. The turntable and the forward support are joined with steel tubing rails. The tube does not recoil. When the charge is fired, pressure is built up in the chamber and gas is fed into the tube through a throttling orifice located between the chamber and the tube.

The tube pressure reaches a maximum soon after torpedo movement begins and decreases gradually to zero as the torpedo clears the muzzle. The firing mechanism was designed for either percussion or electric firing, depending on the type of primer used. The firing pin, which is insulated, is wired to an electric circuit. When the striker bolt is in firing position, it forces the firing pin against the primer, completing the circuit from the control station. The primer may then be fired by hitting the striker knob or by closing the electric circuit with the switch provided at the control station.

Later these torpedo tubes would be removed from the design, with the advent of the newer MK-XIII model torpedo, which would be carried in lightweight MK-1 launching racks, at a total saving of more than 1,400 pounds each. The shorter Mark XIII also took up less deck space, which would be launched using racks, thus eliminating the heavy steel tubes. The Mark 13 also had the advantage of a significantly larger warhead, 600-pounds vs. 466-pounds containing the significantly more powerful explosive Torpex, which was approximately 1.5 times more powerful per unit of weight than TNT. The Mark 13's shorter range and slower speed were considered acceptable trade-offs for boats that usually operated at night and relied on stealth to reach firing position. This system began coming out of the Elco factory in late 1943, with the earlier boats also being changed over to the lightweight rack and torpedo.

The 103 class boats coming out of the Elco factory would carry the 20-mm Oerlikon anti-aircraft cannon on the stern. The weapon needed no external power or cooling supply and could be bolted down in any available deck space. The gun could also be operated by almost anybody with only a limited amount of training.

The air-cooled 20-mm Oerlikon had some unusual features not found in other automatic weapons, including an open breech-block and a spring-recoil/counter-recoil system. It fired a 0.3-pound explosive shell supplied from a detachable magazine that held 60 rounds; expending all of them took just 7½ seconds. The mount on which the gun rested was the MK-4 mount. It was equipped with open ring-sights for aiming. Pointing and training were controlled through a set of handlebars and shoulder rests. The gunner had to lead the target in both traverse and elevation to achieve hits. To aid in spotting, a tracer was usually included in every fifth round. Later this gun would be removed from the stern in favor of the 40mm gun, a harder hitting weapon. The addition of the Bofors 40mm cannon, significantly enhanced the defensive capabilities of PT boats, especially against aerial attacks.

The galley on the Elco 80 footer was spacious in regards to other boats. It was located to starboard from the center line between watertight bulkheads and entered forward through a door. The small sink had over-all dimensions of 14 by 20 by 6 inches and was a commercial porcelain enamel type, with strainer and drain plug.

The galley had cupboards made of western red cedar with door frames of mahogany, and two shelves each with ledges, were built below the sink board and counter. Cupboard space outboard above refrigerator were fitted with partitions and doors, also racks and cutlery drawers to stow specified galley equipment. The small stove was a 24-volt D. C. unit with a latch for anchoring the oven in place, and provided with rough water utensil keepers. A small refrigerator was also provided that was roughly 8 cubic feet, and had its own evaporator unit and ice trays.

The boat contained two toilet’s or heads. There was the officers head, with the crews head being in the fore-peak of the boat. They had a stainless steel sink with which a pump was used to bring water to the basin. This compartment was fitted with medicine cabinet on the after bulkhead, and a frame-less mirror on the forward bulkhead, also, with three grab rails, located on the forward and after bulkhead. Toilet fixtures included a paper holder and soap dish, the grab rails being placed as to function as towel bars. The toilet was a hand pump that would release into a holding tank that released into the sea.

The forward crews quarters provided comfortable bunk space and spacious quarters. They contained upper bunk areas both on port and starboard sides of the forward hull, with a mahogany drop down table which would be used for crew meals. The crew were afforded mahogany painted lockers with air holes, to keep mildew from forming on clothing. The area was painted with a bright white paint, that made it easier to see below decks. There were also over-head lights in this compartment for night use. On the 80 foot design, this was the most spacious compartment on the boat, with thick water proof cushions.

The day room cabin onboard the 103 class boats was considered at the time, to be that of a lounge area for the crew. It was pretty spacious and had six cabin windows, three to a side, for more air. It was located above the fuel tank compartment between watertight bulkheads, with a non watertight door to forward quarters, and sound-insulating door and hatch in after bulkhead to engine room. All of the furnishings above the day room floor were easily removable, so that flooring and tank side panels could be removed for inspection or service of the tanks. In the starboard forward corner, a hatch of at least 22 inches square was cut, with a hinge back top, to provide an exit from the day room, using a steel ladder with tubular rungs mounted on the house side. It had two couches that faced one another for comfort in mind. Potable water was carried in a single 200-gallon tank located in the bilge under the chart room.

There was an area known as the Lazarette. It was the last compartment at the stern of the boat, and was originally designed for a work space. It was accessible through a hinged deck hatch with metal ladder to floor, and through a watertight door in after bulkhead of engine room. In this space was the auxiliary steering apparatus, where if need be they could rig an emergency tiller. It would become a perfect spot for storing gear, such as oil and paint cans, lubrication gear, smoke generator parts, and even extra ammunition.

The 103 class boats produced by Elco would run from 103-196. At that time they would produce a second class of 80 footer, from PT’s 314-367. A third class of boat would be constructed from PT’s 373-383. Several changes with each class of boats were implemented, with a fourth class being PT’s 486-563. A fifth class of boat would be PT’s 565-624. The 624 being the last boat to be excepted by the US Navy. Elco would continue making boats with the last class being PT’s 731-790, which were knock down kits produced and shipped to Russia. PT’s 761-790 were canceled and never shipped.

"SO Radar" refers to the type of radar system that was later installed on many US Navy PT boats, giving them a significant advantage in night operations by allowing them to detect enemy ships at a distance, particularly for targeting supply barges and other vessels in the dark; "SO" stands for "Surface Search" indicating its primary function of detecting ships on the water's surface. The radar allowed PT boats to locate and attack enemy ships at night without relying solely on visual sightings, giving them a tactical advantage. The radar was primarily produced by the Raytheon Company, and had a relatively limited range, typically around 17 nautical miles.

There is no doubt that the Elco 80 foot design, was the most advanced that was produced by the engineers, and the workers of the plant. Elco was the dominant builder of PT boats, producing more than any other small boat builder, with 399 by wars end. Later boats mounted one Bofors 40mm gun, and a 37mm auto cannon coming from the factory. Engineers were constantly improving the quality of the boats and the men and women can certainly be proud of the boats that they built for the war effort.