Chapter Two

Elco’s 77 foot design

It was due to design completion plans that the Bureau of Ordnance decided that the larger boats would have the twenty-one-inch torpedo tubes installed, which would mean an increase in the size of the boats.

Before any changes could be made the bureau decided to review its data on the PT boats and obtain new opinions. The board actually recommended an eighty-foot wooden boat, that was powered by reliable gasoline engines, capable of 40 knots with a range of at least 500 miles at 20 knots. Armament would consist of 4 21” torpedoes and tubes, one smoke generator, four .50 caliber machine guns in two twin mounts, with 5,000 rounds of ammo per barrel. The board also required a satisfactory radio for operational use, and provision stowage for five days.

The Navy would sign a second contract with Elco on September 17, 1940, which was slightly modified on September 25, 1940. This contract called for the construction of PT’s 21-32 and PTC’s 33-44. They would be seventy-seven-feet overall. The PTC clause of the contract was never filled, due to the unsuccessful experiments with the earlier type that convinced the Navy that other craft would be more successful as anti submarine vessels, so the PTC boats 33-44 were built with the same numbers.

The Elco PT-20 class boat was basically a boat with seven feet added on, but it was more than that. The reverse sheer of the hull was not as pronounced as it had been on the 70 footers, and the distance between the cowl vents on the stern also showed the new length to good advantage. Considerable strengthening of the hull could be seen below decks and the intermediate framing was added in the forward section of the pounding area of the bow. Eighteen inches would be added to the boats engine room, and the lazarette was enlarged by five and a half feet, this totaling seven feet. The boats were a V-bottom, hard chine design with a draft ranging from 21/2 feet forward to 41/2 feet aft, and have a loaded displacement of approximately 46 tons. A hard chine design has very little V-shape on its bottom whereas a soft chine boat has a considerable V which gives a sharper entrance into the seas. The hard chine design gives greater speed due to the fact that it causes the boat to plane.

The hard chine design gave greater speed, due to the fact that it causes the boat to plane, but it also causes the boats to become extremely wet in choppy or very rough weather, particularly at slow speeds. The first step in the construction of the boats was the assembly of the prefabricated main frames on a building jig which was a double 12- by 12-inch wooden base extending the entire length of the boat. The frames were built of wood, braced with plywood angles. The bottoms of frames 1 to 34 were laminated of spruce, white oak, and mahogany; the upper part of frames 1 to 34 and the entire frame from 35 to 69 were made of mahogany. All the frame joints were secured with marine glue and screws. Bulkheads are merely frames, properly braced and covered on both sides with fir plywood. They are, for all practical purposes, watertight.

The spruce keel, to which is spliced to an oak stem, is put in place and secured with brass bolts. The chine, which is the hull member forming the joint between the bottom of the hull and the sides, is made of spruce and also bolted on. Spruce diagonal frames on the hull sides and longitudinal battens on the bottom are notched into the main frames and fastened with brass screws. Intermediate frames between the main frames are similarly installed in the three forward compartments. The hull at this point was ready for planking.

The planking is in two layers both made of mahogany boards 6 inches wide. Both layers above the chine are 3/8 inch thick; on the bottom, the inner layer is 3/8 inch, the outer layer 7/16 inch. The two layers are laid on diagonally opposite to each other with sheets of airplane fabric laid in marine glue in-between. The planks were fastened to the main frames below the water line with monel screws and above the waterline with brass screws. The fastenings to the diagonals, battens, intermediate frames and securing the planks to each other where there are no frames are copper nails riveted over burrs. When planking was completed, the hull would be turned over and the inside work begun. Longitudinal girders made of mahogany covered with plywood ran from bulkheads 1, 2, and 3 back to the stern which give the boat a great deal of its stiffness. Cedar clamps or battens were screwed to the inside of the frames on the sides of the hull and ran from bulkhead No. 1 to the stern. The main deck frames are notched, spruce deck longitudinal are screwed in place and a 5/8-inch mahogany plywood deck is put on. The deck is secured to the hull with plywood knees between each frame. The knees are bolted to the deck and to the covering board on top, and to the planking, gunwale, and guard clamp on the sides. An oak rub strake outside the gunwale and an oak chine guard make the outer hull work complete.

The gasoline tanks were mounted on padded frames and secured in place with padded metal straps. Each tank is provided with its own separate fill pipe and each one vents immediately below the gunwale on the outside of the hull. The engines are mounted on bed frames which are secured to the longitudinal girder. Shims were provided for aligning the engines properly.

The canopy was framed with spruce with all corners and angle joints made of mahogany and fastened with screws and glue. The frame is covered, inside and out, with light plywood which is secured with glue. The voids between frames are filled with rubber insulating material. For convenience in removal of tanks and engines, the canopy is made in three sections, each of which can be removed. The forward or pilot-house section contains the sheet aluminum cockpit and the controls. The midships section contains the gun turrets which were plywood except for a thin metal shield on the top. The after, or engine-room section, is very easily removable and is fitted with a hatch large enough to permit the passage of a reverse gear, V-drive or auxiliary generator. All canopy joints are covered with tape made of airplane fabric to make them watertight and metal clamps are used to hold the two sections together.

A great amount of deck cracking was experienced in the 77-foot boat due to the fact that the deck did not have as much flexibility as the hull. This weakness was eliminated by the installation of a hollow fir "strongback" which is a longitudinal stiffener on the deck from forward of the pilothouse to the lazarette hatch on both sides of the canopy. A tendency for the canopy to crack was likewise eliminated by the "strongbacks" and a slightly heavier construction and modified design of the canopy.

The boat's fire-fighting equipment consisted of several small hand CO2 extinguishers and an automatic Lux CO2 system. The two tanks in the Lux system were located in the starboard officer's stateroom with heat actuators in the tank room and engine room which will cause the system to discharge upon a sudden increase in temperature. A manual control was provided on the deck immediately forward of the canopy hatch.

Standard issue MK-XVII torpedo tubes were mounted on the deck, which carried the MK-VIII torpedoes. The tube was made of steel, fabricated by welding. It is pivoted on an aluminum alloy turntable and turntable base. The forward end was mounted on an aluminum alloy support which travels on corrosion-resistant steel plates and is guided by brass Z-bars, cadmium plated. The turntable and the forward support are joined with steel tubing rails. The tube did not recoil.

The VIII had many technical difficulties with its design that would be a bane to the torpedomen who would use them. The first issue came with the process of simply launching the torpedo, which was fraught with its own set of difficulties.

The gyro in the torpedo was sensitive when it was first launched, and it would need to be launched from an even keel, otherwise the torpedo would lose stability when it hit the water. The other issue concerned the launching mechanism. The initial system was set with a black powder charge to push the torpedo out of the tube. This was a problem where the humid climate would cause these charges to misfire, sometimes not putting enough force behind the torpedo to fully eject it from the tube. One other risk of these misfires was what is called "hot running", where the torpedo would run in its tube. Though the warhead could not detonate, the motor would overheat and explode without water to cool it, sending splinters across the deck. Another issue was that the tubes were heavily lubricated with oil and grease to ensure that the torpedo was smoothly launched from the tube. Sometimes during launch, the charge would ignite the lubricants in the tube causing a fire emitting black smoke that would reveal the location of the PT boat.

The power plant of the Elco 77-foot boat consisted of three 1,350-horsepower Super-charged Packard 4M-2500 gasoline engines. The cooling water and lubricating oil in the engines were cooled by use of a heat exchanger in which the cooling medium is sea water. The heat exchanger is a metal cylinder divided into two sections with 50 to 751/4-inch outside diameter copper tubes inside through which salt water flows. The oil and water flow over the tubes, each in its separate section, and are cooled by a constant flow of sea water.

As the engines are installed in the boat, the two wing engines were installed backwards, the reverse gear being towards the bow of the boat. To drive the propeller shafts which run aft, a gear box called a V drive was used. The V drive consists of two cone-shaped gears with roller bearings at each journal. The engine drives one gear which drives the other which, in turn, drives the propeller. Cooling is accomplished by use of water jackets through which sea water is pumped by the engine salt-water pump. A separate oil tank for each V drive was located in the bilge under the unit. Oil is put in the housing of the V drive itself and its level is determined by a bayonet type gauge on the filler plug. Lubrication was furnished by an oil pump driven by the unit itself.

The 2-inch Monel propeller shafts go through the hull through a unit called the stern tube. The stern tube is a bronze casting with a flax-packed gland on the inboard end which keeps the water out of the hull. A packing nut tightens or loosens the packing. Cooling is obtained by circulating salt water with a small scoop. A bronze bushing is lubricated by a permanently installed grease gun. The three propellers were bronze and keyed to the shaft with a bronze key. Great care must be exercised in the installation of propellers to be certain that they are all the way "home" on the taper and not riding the key or off center.

The boats gun turret’s in the first series boats, was the Dewandre type power driven system, of the type in which a yoke carries a mount fitted for the two machine guns, which yoke is suitably pivoted an a carriage of circular form. This carriage rotated on a circular track. With reference to the carriage and track the yoke with the mount may be bodily elevated in a vertical plane. In addition to this bodily elevation the guns were capable of a certain further amount of elevation end depression in any position in which the yoke may be. The carriage moving horizontally carries the guns irrespective of their positions in the vertical plane approximately 340 degrees, and also in any position of the carriage the guns themselves have a further movement to right and left.

The mount was completely automatic. The gunner has only to manipulate the gun to aim at the target when the turret and the yoke follow all the movements of the gun sufficiently so that the aim can be kept on the target all the time. The motive power for operating the turret was compressed air at relatively low pressure needing small pipes and fittings. The air transmits pressure using oil as the hydraulic medium. These type turrets would be on PT-20-44, but would be removed beginning with PT-45 (second class) as the turret was considered too vulnerable and ineffective in combat, particularly against the fast-moving, small targets that PT boats typically engaged. The turret design was prone to fogging of the glass, making it difficult to quickly target multiple enemies. It was also felt that if the air supply was cut off, the turret would become useless.

The boats would choose the open-ring twin mounts, which improved flexibility which allowed for faster aiming and quicker target acquisition. Twin mounts could fire multiple rounds simultaneously, delivering a higher volume of fire. These first mounts were called the Colt style, a scarff-rig system. These would however be changed due to the small ammo boxes, which did not hold sufficient rounds that would be needed.

Changes to the boats turrets would come in the way of the MK-17 mounts, which provided ammunition to the guns, supplied by four boxes, two per gun. The mounts carried 250 rounds per gun. This greatly improved the mounts from the previous Colt style. The twin cradle for .50-caliber machine guns was a flexible, lightweight, scarf-ring type mount, equipped with a hydraulic system to absorb recoil shock. It was designed to be fired by either or both hands.

The second series boats, beginning with PT-46, would begin to have added to their stern, the 20MM A.A. Oerlikon cannon. The Oerlikon was primarily a close-range high-angle A. A. gun. It could be used against surface vessels, but a . 50-caliber machine gun can be used with better success against landing forces, etc. Against dive bombers the 20-mm. was an excellent gun. The ammunition was supplied from a magazine that held 60 rounds.

The magazine was detachable mounted on the gun. It is filled and also serviced while removed from gun. The earlier MK-4 mount’s extended from the cradle, in which the gun is fixed, to the pedestal bolted to the deck. The cradle rotates about the trunnion axis. The mount permits the height of the gun trunnion above the deck to be altered easily and rapidly for any sight angle to suit the convenience of the gunlayer. This is done by the column-raising hand wheel mounted on the pedestal head. The cannon was rated to fire at 450 rounds per minute, using high explosive shells and tracers.

Beginning with PT-46, Elco would add the early MK-II smoke generator which had two tanks. The smaller CO2 tank was upright at the head of the Titanium Tetra chloride tank and towards the center line. This addition would prove as important to the boats survival as other weapons on the boat. When released into the air using Titanium Tetra chloride, it hydrolyzes quickly and resulted in a dense white smoke, in which the boats could hide behind and escape from enemy ships.

It was in the fall of 1941, that the Bureau of Ships, at a meeting decided the boats should be enlarged. The CNO requested that the Bu Ships write up new specifications for a new boat. Elco was invited to submit designs and then bid for the proposed boat. This would mark the end of the Elco 77 foot boats, as the new and improved 103 class 80 foot boats would now become the principle boat that would be built at Elco.