Forward

When I was asked to write the forward for this book, I was both surprised and honored to do so.

I have always enjoyed talking about the Elco Naval Division, having lived next door to the facility almost all of my life, starting in October 1943 to the present. I worked for the Electro Dynamic Company, which during the war were making generators for the Navy Department and the PT boats.

I was employed there for 40 years from 1956 until 1996 when I retired. When Elco closed its doors in 1949, many of their workers came to work at the Electro Dynamic Company, a large plant that was located at 163 Avenue A, in Bayonne New Jersey. Over the years I spoke with many of those workers about their time spent building the PT boats, and its operations, including management and workers. I also had an opportunity to see and read a lot of papers, old brochures etc. This all helped in my knowledge about the plant, and some of the people that worked their during the war years.

Growing up in this neighborhood, I knew many of the workers, both men and women, who were very skilled and dedicated. Elco initially was called the Electric Launch Company which later would be called Elco Motor Yachts, which built electric launches and many other pleasure boats. Prior to World War Two, Elco began their interest in Motor Torpedo Boats and would build a one million dollar state of the art plant that would be called the Elco Naval Division.

One large part of the success of the PT boat program was Irwin Chase, a graduate of the University of Michigan. He started with Elco in 1906 as a Navy architect and worked his way up to Managing Constructor. Chase loved speed and the key to the success of the PT program were the hull designs which worked well when combined with high speed engines.

When one thinks about the massive effort it took to build 399 PT boats during the war years, it boggles the mind. The amount of raw materials being delivered to Elco by rail and ship each day was staggering. Dedicated workers were a huge reason for the success of the company. They worked side by side building a boat that Navy men would be proud of.

This book is a great read for anyone wishing to learn more about this once great company. The photographs contained in this book are priceless and help keep the readers attention. In going through the many pages, I cant help but having a feeling of anticipation. There is no doubt in my mind that Elco is very much alive today, one reason why Franks book is so important to the history of the PT boats.

Andrew J. Shanahan, Jr.