ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I have so many people to thank in assisting me throughout the making of this book, First and foremost I must thank my wife Stacia who has put up with my love for the history of the PT BOATS for the past 42 years. She is my soul mate and without her I would be lost.

Secondly I give special thanks to those that served on our World War Two PT Boats, Bases, and Tenders. They were the Greatest Generation and helped pave the way to victory. I have had the honor to meet so many of them over the years from across the country, and have found them to be a special class of Officers and Sailors. They have always taken me in and treated me like family. Most have taken their final patrol but some are still here with us, well into their nineties, still ready to ride the boats if they could.

Special thanks to my grandsons Dominick, Frankie, and Charlie who although are still young might someday get bitten by the PT Bug like I did some 45 years ago. It is my hope and dream that they will enjoy the history and take the time to learn about these special men and the work they did during World War Two.

I owe a debt of gratitude to Wally Boreger from Save the PT Boat Inc, for his assistance in providing me with many photos to choose for the book. Thanks to Alyce Guthrie from PT BOATS Inc. who always provides sound advise and has been a joy to talk with over the many years I have known her. Special thanks to my dear friend Arthur Frongello who at 96 years of age can still man his station on PT-302 as Quartermaster. His friendship has meant a great deal over the years. Thanks so much to Jon Olson from YKO Studio LLC for helping me fix many of the photos and to James Sawyer for doing the same. Thanks to Charlie B. Jones and Andrew Small for being there when I needed them.

I am indebted to the PT Boat Veterans who have donated so many artifacts to me. I shall never forget you.

Special thanks to all of you that have believed in the work I have been doing for so many years in trying to keep the PT Boat Service in the public eye. It has been plenty of hard work but the rewards have been wonderful.