The Workers That Made It Happen

Chapter 4

It would have been impossible to build Uncle Sam’s PT boat Navy, without the dedicated and skilled workers at Elco. This American boat building and electric motor company operated from 1893 and would close for good in 1949. Elco was the front runner in building pleasure boats before the war, so their experience in wooden boat building was paramount.

Elco signed a contract to build 50 motor launches on April 9, 1915, and by the first of May, they had the first boat's frames erected. This boat would be used to create standardized patterns for the remainder of the order. The speed with which Elco prepared the drawings and patterns strongly would suggest they were working on this design well in advance of the signings.

Elco received a telegram ordering 500 additional Sutphens- (their code name for the motor launches) and the supplemental contract was signed on July 9, 1915. Terms called for completion of 550 boats by November 15, 1916; excluding Sundays, Elco was being asked to build 550 80' boats in 501 working days, an unprecedented assignment. Elco fulfilled this $22 million contract in 488 days, two weeks ahead of schedule. It was due to the hard work and dedication of the workers. They had incredible wood working and boat building skills, that would serve the company well during the building of the PT boats. The period between the two World Wars was Elco's golden age, for during these two decades the company built the cruising powerboats for which it is best remembered today. The world's most popular cruising powerboat was the Elco Cruisette, first drawn up by Irwin Chase in 1915.

The Depression hurt Elco, as it hurt most boat-builders, but the effects of the Depression didn't make themselves felt right away. Elco continued to build boats and pay for eight-page advertising spreads in boating magazines well after 1929. The low point came in 1933, when Elco was reduced to only three full-time employees: Irwin Chase, Glenville Tremaine, and general foreman Charles Lamont. To keep busy, they personally fulfilled orders for spare parts, answered correspondence, and ran exhaustive dynamo meter tests on new engines, just for something to tinker with. Gradually, over several years, the old employees were rehired and boat-building resumed.

It should be noted that many of the experienced boat builders that were building pleasure craft before the war, stayed on with the company to build the PT boats. Workers looking for jobs came from all over New Jersey, New York and Long Island. They came by the Staten Island ferry, then caught a bus close to the plant, or walked if they lived close by. Many took their lunches to work with them, or if they were lucky, they could get one of the local boys to run to the local delicatessen for some good sandwiches. Elco had a small canteen on the grounds, should they wish to order something quick. The company provided the workers with company washed uniforms and aprons.

They were provided with all the necessary tools for boat building, although many of the carpenters that were there for a long time prior to the construction of PT boats brought in their own tool boxes and tools. With the rationing of gasoline, it was tough for those with cars to get back and forth to work. Elco with it’s OPA award set it up for those workers with cars, where they could go to the gasoline station assigned exclusively for their workers. Car pooling was also quite popular during war time.

Elco also had what was known as an apprenticeship programs. This system was put into place on May 1, 1941, its purpose was to help in plant production and was a two year schedule of training, which was completed at the Vocational High School in Bayonne, with the actual mechanics work put into practice at the plant. Many who took these programs became full fledged mechanics inside the Elco shops.

At the height of its PT-boat production, Elco employed more than 3000 men and women working three shifts a day for six days a week. They produced, on average, one PT boat every sixty hours. This brought Elco six consecutive Navy "E" Awards for defense contracting excellence, and earned the company $10 million in profits on a cost-plus basis. Laying off some 2000 of these employees when the war work ended was the worst job Elco ever asked Glen Tremaine to do. In 1939 he had been promoted to works manager and had day-to-day charge of Elco plant operation, including PT-boat design, throughout the war.

Sutphen, Chase, and Tremaine scrambled to find virtually any kind of work to keep the remaining 1000 workmen gainfully employed. In addition to new boat designs, Elco used extensive woodworking equipment to produce the hardwood trim for special-edition Plymouth station wagons; they built bowling lanes and bowling pins; they even produced baseball bats field-tested by the Chicago Cubs during one spring training. It didn't matter; the war had killed Elco. In 1939 Sutphen had doubled the size of Elco's plant and tripled its capacity in order to build the PT boats, and now he had to carry that useless overhead. The market for pleasure yachts wasn't promising, since GIs returning from the war were more interested in raising families and resuming or starting careers. There wasn't much discretionary income for buying top-of-the-line cruisers.

Workers with seniority were kept on during the time after the war. Getting back into the pleasure boat building business was not easy with the huge over-head that Elco had. Elco's parent company management was no help. In 1947, John Jay Hopkins became president of Electric Boat, and he envisioned a defense contracting empire that would have made even Isaac Rice and Sir Trevor Dawson envious. Electric Boat had built most of the submarines bought by the Navy during World War II; its corporate branches included major shipbuilding as well as submarine construction, aircraft manufacturing, electronics and much more. Elco, still building wooden pleasure boats, was a low-tech dead-end as far as Hopkins was concerned.

He told Tremaine that the $10 million profit on PT boats was "water over the dam." The new motto of Electric Boat Company was grow or die, he said. In 1948 Hopkins gave Elco a year to grow; in April, 1949, the unhealthy limb was pruned. Tremaine was given the task of laying off the remaining employees- an even more sorrowful task than previously- and of organizing auctions to sell the plant, equipment, and inventory. On the last day of 1949, Elco’s Works Manager, Glenville Sinclair Tremaine padlocked the gate of the Electric Launch Company, handed the keys to an Electric Boat Company security guard, and drove home.