
Somerville AD, Sugiyama N. Why were New World rabbits not domesticated? Anim Front. 2021 Jun 19;11(3):62-68. doi: 10.1093/af/vfab026. PMID: 34158990; PMCID: PMC8214442.

In this article, we attempted to explain why though both Old World and New World rabbits embarked on pathways to domestication, only Old World rabbits obtained this status. We reviewed the archeological and historical evidence for the antiquity and intensity of human–leporid interactions in both Europe and North America, with an emphasis on new data from the archaeological site of Teotihuacan. We demonstrated that rabbits were dietary staples across large portions of North America and the Iberian Peninsula for many thousands of years. After reviewing the differing behavioral strategies of O. cuniculus and S. floridanus, we found that the social tendencies of these two species were the factors with the greatest divergence. Although O. cuniculus is gregarious and inhabits subterranean communal warrens, S. floridanus is solitary and their populations do not spatially cluster. Additionally, the biodiversity of rabbit species in North America encouraged humans to engage in extensive relationships with multiple leporid taxa rather than an intensive relationship with a singular rabbit species, as had occurred with O. cuniculus in Europe. We suggest that these factors made the European rabbit a more likely candidate for domestication than eastern cottontails.

Finally, the parallels observed in the human–rabbit relationships in Europe and North America challenge us to reconsider the utility of the concept of domestication itself. For thousands of years and in both Europe and North America humans hunted, traded, and managed rabbits in captivity, but one rabbit population ultimately became the focus of intensive directed breeding by humans in southern France. Although all domesticated breeds today can be traced back to this small population, the archeological record demonstrates the rich history of human–rabbit interactions in Europe and North America. The observation that humans were moving, managing, and feeding populations of wild rabbits in multiple areas around the globe prior to the domestication of the European rabbit suggests that the binary distinction between wild and domesticated may fail to capture the complexities of many human–animal relationships.
---

Julia E. Fa, John R. Stewart, Lluís Lloveras, J. Mario Vargas,
Rabbits and hominin survival in Iberia,
Journal of Human Evolution,
Volume 64, Issue 4,
2013,
Abstract
High dependence on the hunting and consumption of large mammals by some hominins may have limited their survival once their preferred quarry became scarce or disappeared. Adaptation to smaller residual prey would have been essential after the many large-bodied species decreased in numbers. We focus on the use of a superabundant species, the rabbit, to demonstrate the importance of this taxon in Iberia as fundamental to predators. We show that the use of the rabbit over time has increased, and that there could have been differential consumption by Neanderthals and Anatomically Modern Humans (AMH). Analysis of bone remains from excavations throughout Iberia show that this lagomorph was a crucial part of the diet of AMH but was relatively unutilised during the Mousterian, when Neanderthals were present. We first present changes in mammalian biomass and mean body mass of mammals over 50,000 years, to illustrate the dramatic loss of large mammalian fauna and to show how the rabbit may have contributed a consistently high proportion of the available game biomass throughout that period. Unlike the Italian Peninsula and other parts of Europe, in Iberia the rabbit has provided a food resource of great importance for predators including hominins. We suggest that hunters that could shift focus to rabbits and other smaller residual fauna, once larger-bodied species decreased in numbers, would have been able to persist. From the evidence presented here, we postulate that Neanderthals may have been less capable of prey-shifting and hence use the high-biomass prey resource provided by the rabbit, to the extent AMH did.