“Gil Henry—short and pudgy and lives at the YMCA, is a very junior partner in a big law firm. He had more curiosity than an old maid, his mind is so sharp it nearly cuts his ears off, and he has a constitution with 22 amendments.” 
“Hubbell: a gentleman’s gentleman—but no gentleman.”
“Raymond Ainsley—Lennox Ainsley’s stepson. To know him was to hate him.”
“Cornelia Potts—The choleric Old Woman, who ruled her roost with malice aforethought” and “Thurlow Potts—Her eldest son, a most insultable man.”
“Robert Tindle—Carlotta Ashbury’s son who is inclined to take life a little too easy following his mother’s second marriage. His face doesn’t have any particular expression, but could be used for an ad for contented cows.”
“Sam Cusick, a notorious gangster, is scrawny, thin-faced, with a long, drooping nose. He looks harmless—except for the expression in his ratlike eyes.”
“Sam Dakkers—His head was as bald as the eight-ball he found himself behind.” “Lucky Schott—Captain of the S.S. Shalimar. At first glance he looked like Santa Claus, but no one ever made that mistake a second time.” 
Elvira, “a girl in her twenties,“slender and lithe. Her smoke grey eyes are set too far apart for trustworthiness, though not for beauty, and she’s more dangerous than a gallon of nitrol.”
riting under the alias Robert Caine Frazer—defines series hero Kilby as “an alertly poised, debonair Englishman, employed as an investigator by a multimillion-dollar international investment corporation, [who] was as deft with a beautiful woman as he was with his deadly switch-blade cane.” Frank Gruber’s The Buffalo Box (Bantam, 1946) tries to stimulate reader curiosity with this cryptic come-on: “Simon Lash—a crack private detective, had it; lost it; but regained it.” And in The Bigger They Come (Pocket, 1953), the first of Gardner’s 30 spirited Cool and Lam tales, greedy and corrupt investigative-agency proprietor Cool is colorfully pictured as “a sizable chunk of woman with the majesty of a snow-capped mountain and the assurance of a steam roller.” Of Lam, the disbarred lawyer and certified romantic whom she employs to do most of the snooping, it’s said simply that he’s “a physical weakling, but a mental giant.”

Jules Langley—A paunchy jeweler with a mouth like a locked purse, he performed services for rich and poor impartially—he cheated them both. 

Chief Dakin, Wrightsville’s Chief of Police, who combined the look of a terrapin with the mouth of a poet. 

Lieutenant Matt Conroy—Of the Homicide Squad; a splendid detective with the finesse of an elephant. (Widow’s Pique by Blair Treynor, Permabooks, 1957)

Alonzo Platin—He was a rich man who collected jade, gold, and human souls. 

Anthony Goodwin—a refugee English poet whose genius is to madness near allied, he says. He has long, intense limbs and a long, intense aversion to toil. 

Morgan Birks—an unfaithful husband being sued for what unfaithful husbands are usually being sued for.

Sikorski—a concert pianist with a past mixed up with Mrs. Robjohn’s. Thinks he might have children somewhere because “these things happen.” (She Shall Have Murder by Delano Ames, Dell, 1951)

Miles—the close-mouthed Harper chauffeur, looks like Humphrey Bogart, except that Bogart never looked so tough. He is cold as an eel and as expressionless as a bottle of beer. 
Pete—a good guy but his time was up. 



Christine Vanlinden—Beauties are a dime a dozen in a Charteris thriller, but it will be a long time before there will be an equal to this copperhead bundle of T.N.T.

Mildred Havens—Aunt Mildred works her fingers to the bone making everybody comfortable, but she also works her tongue twice as hard making conversational excursions into everyone’s privacy. (Crimson Friday by Dorothy Cameron Disney, Dell, 1946)

Enid Monck—A loquacious ex-actress whose star had gone out with silent films, she rebelled against middle age by donning war paint and attempting to seduce every eligible male aboard—and some who weren’t eligible. (Many Brave Hearts by Donald M. Douglas, Pocket, 1960)

Mary Helen Crane—Nella’s niece has large eyes, a long chin, and a babyish mouth. She is not pretty but one keeps wondering why not. Her entrance into the Peabody house changes its tempo from cool placidity to something almost feverish. (The Glass Mask by Lenore Glen Offord, Dell, 1947)

Louisa—Ed’s stepdaughter and very beautiful, is supposed to have just recently come home from a convent, but Louisa has knowledge she hasn’t learned in a convent. (The Baited Blonde by Robinson MacLean, Dell, 1951)

Johnny Wyse, who died; and to avenge whose death two of the following also died—and one was a murderer

Isabel Drew, a Jezebel

Edgar Port, just a sugar daddy

Earl Anderson, “a poor player”

Brian Bryan, a knight in armour

Perpetua Kirk, a damsel in distress

George Exmouth, a very young young man

Susan Betchley, a not very young young lady