Medieval manuscripts blog
Latest postsAbout this blog
Bringing our medieval manuscripts to life

Search this blog
Search this blog
 Search
Main
Previous post
Next post
16 June 2021

Medieval killer rabbits: when bunnies strike back
Vengeful, merciless and brutally violent... yes that’s right, we’re talking about medieval bunnies. Rabbits can often be found innocently frolicking in the decorated borders or illuminations of medieval manuscripts, but sometimes, for reasons unknown, these adorable fluffy creatures turn into stone-cold killers. These darkly humorous images of medieval killer bunnies still strike a chord with modern viewers, always proving a hit on social media and popularised by Monty Python and the Holy Grail’s Beast of Caerbannog, ‘the most foul, cruel, and bad-tempered rodent you ever set eyes on!’.

While re-cataloguing the Arnstein Passional, made at Arnstein Abbey in Germany around the 1170s, for the Harley cataloguing project, we spotted a particularly early example of killer bunny imagery (could it be the earliest known?). This decorated letter ‘T’ is being used as a gallows on which two rabbits or hares hang a human hunter. His identity is made clear by the hunting horn slung over his shoulder. The rabbits stand on their hindlegs and point with their front paws as if jeering in sinister glee.

Rabbits hang a hunter from a decorated letter ‘T’
Rabbits hang a hunter from a decorated letter ‘T’. The Arnstein Passional, Arnstein, Germany, c. 1170s: Harley MS 2801, f. 151r
This image gives us a clue about why medieval artists showed rabbits behaving so violently. In real life, rabbits and hares are docile prey animals. But in decorated initials and marginalia, medieval artists often depicted ‘the world turned upside down’, where roles are reversed and the impossible becomes the norm. So here, rabbits are violent hunters hellbent on punishing anyone who has committed crimes against rabbit-kind.

Perhaps the most elaborate example of the killer bunny theme appears in the Smithfield Decretals, illuminated in London in the 1340s. This manuscript contains multiple series of marginal scenes in which stories unfold over consecutive pages like a comic strip. In this series of scenes, we see how a group of giant beefy rabbits get their gruesome revenge on a hunter. First a rabbit archer shoots the hunter in the back, then the rabbits tie him up and haul him before a rabbit judge to be tried. After a guilty verdict is delivered, the ruthless rabbits drag the hunter away and behead him.

Collage of images from the Smithfield Decretals in which rabbits capture, try and execute a hunter
Rabbits capture, try and execute a hunter. The Smithfield Decretals, decorated in London, England, in the 1340s: Royal MS 10 E IV, f. 59v-61v
Not content with inflicting punishment on the hunter, the fluffy ruffians then set their sights on a hound. Hounds were widely used for hunting rabbits and hares, making them prime targets for bunny vengeance. In a series of scenes mirroring the previous ones, the rabbits are shown shooting the hound with arrows, tying him up, trying him at rabbit court, carting him away and then hanging him.

Collage of images from the Smithfield Decretals in which rabbits capture, try and execute a hound
Rabbits capture, try and execute a hound. The Smithfield Decretals, decorated in London, England, in the 1340s: Royal MS 10 E IV, f. 62r-64r
Another rabbit goes hunting for hounds in this Book of Hours made in England in the 1320s. On one page the rabbit sets out with a full quiver of arrows, blowing on a hunting horn. On the other side of the page he returns triumphant with his arrows used up and a small hound strung up on the end of his bow.

A rabbit huntsman sets out and returns with his quarry
A rabbit huntsman sets out and returns with his quarry. A Book of Hours, England, 1320s: Harley MS 6563, f. 20r-v
Some rather more chivalrous rabbits engage in knightly combat with hounds in the margins of the Breviary of Renaud de Bar, made in Metz in France between 1302 and 1303. Here they take up lances, swords and shields and do battle. In one instance a bunny rides on the back of a snail while the opposing hound rides on the back of a bunny who looks like he’s just noticed with some puzzlement that he’s fighting on the wrong side.

A hound riding on a rabbit and a rabbit riding on a snail battle with shields and lances
A hound riding on a rabbit and a rabbit riding on a snail battle with shields and lances. The Breviary of Renaud de Bar (Winter portion), Metz, France, 1302-03: Yates Thompson MS 8, f. 294r
   A rabbit and a hound fight with swords and shields
A rabbit and a hound fight with swords and shields. The Breviary of Renaud de Bar (Winter portion), Metz, France, 1302-03: Yates Thompson MS 8, f. 181r
But the rabbits don’t stop at conquering their traditional foes. Having got a taste for warfare, they are ready to take on any adversary. Like the Beast of Caerbannog, these savage rodents could strike fear into the heart of even the bravest knight.

A knight swings his sword at a rabbit which rears up on its hind legs
A knight swings his sword at a rabbit which rears up on its hind legs. The Gorleston Psalter, East Anglia, England, 1310-24: Add MS 49622, f. 149v
   A man and a rabbit approach one another with swords and shields
A man and a rabbit approach one another with swords and shields. The Maastricht Hours, Liège, Belgium: : Stowe MS 17, f. 240v
They rampage through the manuscript margins, wielding axes and taking on anyone unfortunate enough to cross them.

An axe-wielding rabbit approaches a king
An axe-wielding rabbit approaches a king. The Gorleston Psalter, East Anglia, England, 1310-24: Add 49622, fol. 13v
   An axe-wielding rabbit riding on the back of a hound
An axe-wielding rabbit riding on the back of a hound. John le Breton, Treatise on the Laws of England, England, c. 1305: Harley MS 324, f. 3v
Given the murderous reputation of medieval rabbits, the demonic expression on the face of this bunny baker raises alarming questions about the nature of his baked goods. Surely those aren’t human pies... are they?

A rabbit pushes a tray of baked goods into an oven
A rabbit pushes a tray of baked goods into an oven. Pontifical, England, 1st quarter of the 15th century: Lansdowne MS 451, f. 6r
Luckily, unlike their counterparts in medieval marginalia, 21st-century rabbits are sweet and harmless. But these medieval images remind us to always treat rabbits with respect – you never know when they might decide it’s time to strike back!

For more medieval rabbits, check out our previous blogpost on Medieval rabbits: the good, the bad and the bizarre. If you’d like to read more about the strange world of medieval marginalia, take a look at past blogposts such as Ludicrous figures in the margin, 'Virile, if somewhat irresponsible' design, and the ever-popular Knight v Snail.

Eleanor Jack

---
Abstract
High dependence on the hunting and consumption of large mammals by some hominins may have limited their survival once their preferred quarry became scarce or disappeared. Adaptation to smaller residual prey would have been essential after the many large-bodied species decreased in numbers. We focus on the use of a superabundant species, the rabbit, to demonstrate the importance of this taxon in Iberia as fundamental to predators. We show that the use of the rabbit over time has increased, and that there could have been differential consumption by Neanderthals and Anatomically Modern Humans (AMH). Analysis of bone remains from excavations throughout Iberia show that this lagomorph was a crucial part of the diet of AMH but was relatively unutilised during the Mousterian, when Neanderthals were present. We first present changes in mammalian biomass and mean body mass of mammals over 50,000 years, to illustrate the dramatic loss of large mammalian fauna and to show how the rabbit may have contributed a consistently high proportion of the available game biomass throughout that period. Unlike the Italian Peninsula and other parts of Europe, in Iberia the rabbit has provided a food resource of great importance for predators including hominins. We suggest that hunters that could shift focus to rabbits and other smaller residual fauna, once larger-bodied species decreased in numbers, would have been able to persist. From the evidence presented here, we postulate that Neanderthals may have been less capable of prey-shifting and hence use the high-biomass prey resource provided by the rabbit, to the extent AMH did.

Julia E. Fa, John R. Stewart, Lluís Lloveras, J. Mario Vargas,
Rabbits and hominin survival in Iberia,
Journal of Human Evolution,
Volume 64, Issue 4,
2013,
---
In this article, we attempted to explain why though both Old World and New World rabbits embarked on pathways to domestication, only Old World rabbits obtained this status. We reviewed the archeological and historical evidence for the antiquity and intensity of human–leporid interactions in both Europe and North America, with an emphasis on new data from the archaeological site of Teotihuacan. We demonstrated that rabbits were dietary staples across large portions of North America and the Iberian Peninsula for many thousands of years. After reviewing the differing behavioral strategies of O. cuniculus and S. floridanus, we found that the social tendencies of these two species were the factors with the greatest divergence. Although O. cuniculus is gregarious and inhabits subterranean communal warrens, S. floridanus is solitary and their populations do not spatially cluster. Additionally, the biodiversity of rabbit species in North America encouraged humans to engage in extensive relationships with multiple leporid taxa rather than an intensive relationship with a singular rabbit species, as had occurred with O. cuniculus in Europe. We suggest that these factors made the European rabbit a more likely candidate for domestication than eastern cottontails.

Finally, the parallels observed in the human–rabbit relationships in Europe and North America challenge us to reconsider the utility of the concept of domestication itself. For thousands of years and in both Europe and North America humans hunted, traded, and managed rabbits in captivity, but one rabbit population ultimately became the focus of intensive directed breeding by humans in southern France. Although all domesticated breeds today can be traced back to this small population, the archeological record demonstrates the rich history of human–rabbit interactions in Europe and North America. The observation that humans were moving, managing, and feeding populations of wild rabbits in multiple areas around the globe prior to the domestication of the European rabbit suggests that the binary distinction between wild and domesticated may fail to capture the complexities of many human–animal relationships.

Somerville AD, Sugiyama N. Why were New World rabbits not domesticated? Anim Front. 2021 Jun 19;11(3):62-68. doi: 10.1093/af/vfab026. PMID: 34158990; PMCID: PMC8214442.

---
Research Report by Grok
Key Moments in Rabbit History and Culture

Key Moments in Rabbit History and Culture
Era/Culture	Event/Moment	Description	Source
Neolithic Era (England, Germany)	Worship of Eostre	Hares associated with the goddess Eostre, symbolizing spring and fertility.	Smithsonian Magazine
Ancient Egypt	Sacred Hares	Hares linked to the moon, sacred to Thoth, symbol of wisdom. Amulets for good luck.	PetEarnest
Ancient Greece	Association with Goddesses	Hares associated with Artemis (hunt, wild places) and Aphrodite (love, fertility).	Ohio Thoughts
Aztec Civilization	Centzon Totochtin	Rabbit gods of drink, drunkenness, fertility, and the moon.	Wikipedia
Chinese Folklore	Jade Rabbit	Lives on the moon, makes medicine for the gods, celebrated in Mid-Autumn Festival.	Roots.gov.sg
Medieval Europe	Magic and Witchcraft	Beliefs that witches could shapeshift into hares; “lucky rabbit’s foot” superstition.	PetEarnest
16th–18th Century Europe	Rabbits as Hermaphrodites	Belief in rabbits as hermaphrodites influenced art and literature.	Wikipedia
18th Century	Introduction to Australia	Rabbits become invasive species, causing ecological damage.	Wikipedia
19th Century America	Br’er Rabbit Stories	Trickster rabbit symbolizing resilience and survival.	Danny With Love
Late 19th to Early 20th Century	Easter Bunny	Popularization in America and global spread, symbolizing fertility and renewal.	Wikipedia
20th Century	Literature and Media	Characters like Peter Rabbit, Watership Down, Bugs Bunny.	Wikipedia
Native American Cultures	Trickster Rabbit	Rabbit as trickster in stories, clan animal, and Rabbit Dance.	Native American Indian Rabbit Legends
African Folklore	Kalulu the Hare	Trickster figure embodying wit and cunning.	Wikipedia
Asian Cultures	Moon Rabbits	Rabbits on the moon making mochi (Japan) or rice cakes (Korea).	Wikipedia
Jewish Folklore	Cowardice	Association with cowardice due to mistranslation.	Wikipedia
Christian Tradition	Easter Bunny	Symbol of resurrection and new life in Easter celebrations.	Wikipedia
Contemporary Culture	Modern Symbols	Playboy Bunny, Energizer Bunny, “rabbit rabbit rabbit” superstition.	Wikipedia
Conclusion
Rabbits and hares have woven themselves into the fabric of human history, embodying a remarkable range of meanings across cultures and eras. From divine lunar figures in Ancient Egypt and China to trickster heroes in Native American and African folklore, their roles reflect universal themes of fertility, cunning, and renewal. Historical events, such as their ecological impact in Australia, and modern cultural icons, like Bugs Bunny and the Easter Bunny, further illustrate their versatility. This oral history celebrates the rabbit’s enduring legacy, proving that even the smallest creatures can leave a lasting imprint on human imagination and society.